<<<PAGE_1>>>
GESDA 2026 SCIENCE BREAKTHROUGH RADAR

Geneva Science and Diplomacy Anticipator’s Annual Report on Science Trends  at 5, 10 and 25 Years
<<<END_PAGE_1>>>

<<<PAGE_2>>>

<<<END_PAGE_2>>>

<<<PAGE_3>>>

<<<END_PAGE_3>>>

<<<PAGE_4>>>
INTRODUCTION

Explore our online   digital platform

radar.gesda.global
<<<END_PAGE_4>>>

<<<PAGE_5>>>
Table of contents

INTRODUCTION

Pages 2–33  A letter from the Chairmen Peter Brabeck-Letmathe  Patrick Aebischer

Introductory essay: GESDA’s   approach to science anticipation  Michael Hengartner  Martin Müller  Sophie Gilbert

About the GESDA Science  Breakthrough Radar®

The GESDA Pulse of Science

Facts and figures

Executive summary  Highlights of the 2026 edition

Science Lens: The future of research  Sabina Leonelli  Richard Williams

Spotlight on the Pulse of Society:  Geneva Public Portal to Anticipation  Sarah Kenderdine  Niniane Paeffgen

Acknowledgements

SCIENTIFIC PLATFORMS

Pages 34–331  Quantum Revolution & Advanced AI

• Pulse of Science: Anticipated scientific trends  in Quantum Revolution & Advanced AI

• Pulse of Diplomacy: Harnessing quantum for all

• Pulse of Impact: Quantum Computing

• Pulse of Society: Global opinions and changing  sentiment towards Quantum Revolution   & Advanced AI

Human Augmentation

• Pulse of Science: Anticipated scientific trends  in Human Augmentation

• Pulse of Diplomacy: Unlocking next-generation  neurotechnology applications

• Pulse of Impact: Cognitive Enhancement

• Pulse of Society: Global opinions and changing  sentiment towards Human Augmentation

Eco-Regeneration & Geoengineering

• Pulse of Science: Anticipated scientific trends  in Eco-Regeneration & Geoengineering

• Pulse of Diplomacy: Progressing pandemic  preparedness; Climate resilience and food security;  Governing space’s next frontier to benefit all;  Bridging science and diplomacy for the future   of corals

• Pulse of Impact: Future Food Systems

• Pulse of Society: Global opinions and  changing sentiment towards Eco-Regeneration  & Geoengineering

Science & Diplomacy

• Pulse of Science: Anticipated scientific trends  in Science & Diplomacy

• Pulse of Diplomacy: Rethinking intellectual  property rights in the age of rapid scientific  progress; Democratising science literacy: high-level  political segment; GESDA Anticipation Gateway

• Pulse of Impact: Digital Security

• Pulse of Society: Global opinions and changing  sentiment towards Science Diplomacy

Knowledge Foundations

• Pulse of Science: Anticipated scientific trends  in Knowledge Foundations

• Pulse of Diplomacy: Nourishing science culture

• Pulse of Impact: Synthetic Biology

• Pulse of Society: Global opinions and changing  sentiment towards Knowledge Foundations

1
<<<END_PAGE_5>>>

<<<PAGE_6>>>
INTRODUCTION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 2

A letter from the Chairmen

Understanding and anticipating scientific breakthroughs will unlock a better future for all

We stand at an extraordinary inflection point   in human history. When GESDA was founded  five years ago by the Swiss government with the  support from the Canton and City of Geneva, and  private sector partners, we anticipated change  accelerated by science and technology — but  even we could not have foreseen the breathtaking  velocity of transformation that would follow.

The world has been reshaped by forces that seemed  like science fiction just half a decade ago. AI has  evolved from laboratory curiosity to civilisational  catalyst. Brain-machine interfaces are turning  thought into action, liberating those trapped by  paralysis. The exploitation of space has accelerated  beyond governmental monopolies into a new frontier  of human possibility. Yet alongside these marvels,   we have weathered unprecedented challenges:   a global pandemic that redefined healthcare delivery  and vaccine technology, conflicts that have tested  international resolve and economic turbulence that  has strained the fabric of global cooperation.

These convergent dynamics — technological  breakthroughs and societal transformations —  demand more than reactive governance and the  status quo. They require an anticipation of future  science, followed by action.

That is why the GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®  has never been more essential. This fifth edition  represents something unique: the collective visions   of the future of 2500 scientists spanning 40 areas  of research, mapping year after year the evolution  of the scientific landscape across 5-, 10- and 25‑year  horizons. This is not mere speculation — it is rigorous  anticipation rooted in a solid methodology designed  to equip decision-makers, legislators, diplomats,  thought leaders and the broader public with  the strategic intelligence needed to navigate an  uncertain future accelerated by advances in science  and technology.

Combining anticipation and action: use the future to  build the present

GESDA combines anticipation and action. While  others debate the implications of emerging science,  we build the infrastructure for harnessing tomorrow’s  breakthroughs. The Open Quantum Institute,  established in partnership with CERN, UBS and  more than 20 nations, exemplifies this approach.  Rather than waiting for quantum technologies to  mature, we are actively shaping their development  to serve humanity’s greatest challenges, from climate  modelling to drug discovery, in line with the UN  Sustainable Development Goals.

This year’s GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®  highlights nine transformative domains that will  define the next quarter-century: AI that transcends  current limitations, cognitive enhancement that  expands human potential, engineering of human  biology that could halt or reverse ageing and grow  transplantable organs, ecological science that could  restore life on our planet, pathogen biology that  prepares us for future pandemics, the geopolitics of  science and technology that makes us understand  the increased importance of science in international  relations, our accelerating understanding of language  and its evolution, mathematical breakthroughs that  will unlock solutions we cannot yet imagine, and, as  a fresh and more transversal contribution, how these  anticipated science and technology breakthroughs  will challenge our fundamental assumptions about  human existence and social conditions at a planetary  level — a phenomenon that we summarise in the  newly coined term Planetarised Humanity.
<<<END_PAGE_6>>>

<<<PAGE_7>>>
Leadership in transition

As GESDA enters its sixth year, we celebrate both  continuity and renewal. Sandro Giuliani’s pioneering  leadership as CEO established GESDA as a unique  force in anticipatory science diplomacy. Now, under  the dynamic steering of Professor Marilyne Andersen  as Director General — whose distinguished career  at EPFL, the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology  in Lausanne, and exceptional leadership experience  uniquely qualify her for this moment — GESDA is  positioned to expand its influence and impact. We are  pleased that Sandro Giuliani will continue to support  us as Senior Advisor to the Board.

Our global footprint has expanded dramatically,  promoting International Geneva around the world  through events and activities. Nearly half a million  visitors experienced and interacted with our Geneva  Public Portal to Anticipation at the 2025 World Expo  in Osaka — an immersive journey into possible futures  shaped by scientific breakthroughs, developed in  collaboration with Professor Sarah Kenderdine’s  laboratory at EPFL.

Our anticipatory leadership programmes, which   are supported by the Wellcome Trust, are cultivating   a new generation of decision-makers equipped   to anticipate and act on the challenges ahead.   Building on the fourth Science Diplomacy Week  in Geneva in May this year, GESDA adapted the  programme to new audiences and contexts in  Singapore, Manila and San José, with additional  activities planned in Istanbul and Pretoria.

The NeuroFutures imperative

Perhaps no initiative better exemplifies GESDA’s  unique approach to anticipatory science diplomacy  than NeuroFutures, launched at this year’s Geneva  Science and Diplomacy Anticipation Summit. This  global alliance of philanthropic foundations and  partners represents a crucial intervention at a pivotal  moment. Brain-computer interfaces are advancing   at exponential speed, promising to restore function   to those with paralysis, enhance human cognition   and fundamentally alter the boundary between   mind and machine.

The decisions made in the next few years will  determine whether these technologies amplify human  flourishing or fuel new social inequalities. NeuroFutures  embodies GESDA’s core philosophy: rather than  waiting to regulate technologies after they emerge,  we are creating the frameworks for responsible  development in real time, ensuring that transformative  capabilities serve all humanity.

The anticipation urgency

The scientific breakthroughs detailed in this report  are not distant possibilities — they are emerging  realities. These developments will reshape geopolitics,  economics, social structures and the very meaning of  human identity. The nations, institutions and leaders  who understand and anticipate these changes will  thrive. Those who do not will be left behind.

We invite you to engage with the 2026 GESDA Science  Breakthrough Radar not as passive observers but as  active participants in shaping the future. The future is  not something that happens to us — it is something  we create through the choices we make today.

The science is clear. The opportunities are  unprecedented. The time for action is now.

Peter Brabeck-Letmathe  Chairman of the Board of Directors  GESDA

Patrick Aebischer  Vice Chairman of the Board of Directors  GESDA

3
<<<END_PAGE_7>>>

<<<PAGE_8>>>
INTRODUCTION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 4

Introductory essay:  GESDA’s approach to science anticipation

Michael O. Hengartner   Chair of GESDA’s Academic Forum,  President of the ETH Board

Martin Müller  Executive Director of Science  Anticipation at GESDA

Sophie Gilbert   Programme Lead for the GESDA  Science Breakthrough Radar® at GESDA

New breakthroughs in science and technology  development are causing us to experience rapid  changes in our understanding of ourselves  as humans, how our societies work and how  we live with our planet. However, science and  technology development, whilst playing a huge  role in driving changes to the world around us and  our understanding of ourselves, do not happen  by themselves. Rather, they are the result of a  multi‑year, or more often multi-decade, endeavour  by science and research communities around  the globe. The imaginings and aspirations of this  community, and the multiple goals that they are  striving towards, therefore, provide a vital glimpse  into the possible futures that may one day come  to pass, be that in the development of cures  for terminal diseases, the understanding of the  connectivities and interdependencies of entire  ecosystems on- and off-planet, or the discovery   of new mathematical paradigms that can unlock  new modes of manufacturing or computation.

However, to live in a fair and sustainable society  in the future means that there is an imperative to  understand what these imagined futures may be  and to allow time for wider debate and action before  they are upon us. To this end, GESDA practises  science anticipation. Through this practice, we can  recognise that the future is not predetermined but  can instead identify the wide range of possibilities  open to us, empowering us to make decisions in  the present which can influence what happens in  the future. Through this ability to act, we are freed  to consider aspects of our future as being malleable  to creative forces and novelty — as long as suitable  enabling conditions are given today.
<<<END_PAGE_8>>>

<<<PAGE_9>>>
For GESDA, therefore, science anticipation  translates as the capacity to explore the horizon  of possibilities as a basis to debate and forge  global and inclusive coalitions before science and  technology breakthroughs are deployed without full  consideration of possible impacts — or advantageous  developments are not deployed at all. GESDA aims  to act as an honest broker between the scientific  community, diplomacy and all relevant sectors of  society to encourage these open debates about how  we wish to shape the future and what opportunities  for action can be taken today. The wide coverage  of anticipated advances detailed in the GESDA  Science Breakthrough Radar® assists in providing  the enabling conditions for action to happen in the  present to build towards a more intentional future.

But how does science anticipation happen in  practice? The answer lies in the expertise and deep  insights of GESDA’s Academic Forum, the global  community of scientists and researchers who form  the bedrock of GESDA’s work on science anticipation.  Encompassing over 30 different Anticipation  Committees, as well as many more individual  contributors, the expertise of the Academic Forum  spans the information sciences, human biology,  environmental sciences, social sciences and  humanities, and core foundational knowledge.

5
<<<END_PAGE_9>>>

<<<PAGE_10>>>
INTRODUCTION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 6

Led by an academic chair, each Anticipation  Committee brings together leading researchers  to facilitate in-depth discussions regarding  anticipated developments over the next 5, 10 and  25 years. The results of these discussions provide  the content within the briefs of the GESDA Science  Breakthrough Radar®.

To keep up with the latest developments across  the different fields of research, we work closely  with the chairs of each committee to identify the  sub‑topics to focus on. Where new emerging trends  are identified outside our focus areas, we invite  domain‑expert researchers to provide in-depth  analyses as “invited contributions”, of which many  mature into a fully formed Anticipation Committee  to explore the topic.

In order to explore cross-disciplinary and  transdisciplinary themes emerging from the  various areas of our science-anticipation work, we  also convene a small number of multidisciplinary,  multi‑day workshops to dig deep into a particular  area of interest. The reports from these workshops  can be viewed in the Radar as “deep dives” and this  year include “Sleep Augmentation”, exploring the  intersection of sleep research with ageing research,  and “Planetarised Humanity”, a deep investigation  into the emerging role for the humanities and  social sciences in a technology-dominated world.  These deep dives provide a transversal perspective  on converging themes arising from new trends in  research in different areas, nourishing both GESDA’s  pipeline of initiatives and its practice of science  anticipation.

The GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® also  contains three science anticipation “lenses”: the  Geopolitics Lens, the Philosophy Lens and the  Science Lens. These pieces of novel academic  research use the basis of the insights contained  within the Radar to provide a transversal perspective  on how the Radar’s horizons may affect and be  affected by geopolitics, philosophy and the practice  of science itself in the future. We are deeply grateful  to the members of our Peace and War initiative, our  College of Philosophers and the researchers involved  in our Science Lens for their expertise in developing  these perspectives.

Finally, in addition to the detailed qualitative science  trends contained within the Radar, we also calculate  a quantitative “Anticipation Potential” score for each  topic area, mapped onto our Radar visualisation.  Each topic’s Anticipation Potential reflects the  opinion of an extended network of subject-specific  global experts regarding: the uncertainty of future  science breakthroughs in a research field over the  next 25 years; the transformative nature of the  breakthrough for science, technology, humanity,  society and our planet; and the opportunity for  multilateral action in the present to ensure that a  breakthrough’s potential is realised. Consequently,  a field with high Anticipation Potential combines  the potential of highly transformative futures with  clear opportunities for action in the present. This also  allows us to identify where researchers feel there is  an urgency to anticipate the changes that may be  caused by research in a certain area or whether the  community believes that these are already being  addressed — allowing us to align our focus for  science anticipation towards those topics with the  highest anticipation potential.
<<<END_PAGE_10>>>

<<<PAGE_11>>>
This year, we are delighted to welcome members  of 13 new Anticipation Committees to our GESDA  Academic Forum. The expertise spanned by these  new committees includes entirely new topics for  the GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®, namely  Advanced AI, Extended Reality, Engineering  Human Biology, Energy Engineering, Ecology,  Pathogen Biology, Futures Research, Language and  Communication, Mathematics, and Fungal Biology.  Through this expansion of our community and  represented expertise, we are delighted to present  to you this enriched edition of the Radar, which  captures the new and emerging trends in science,  research and technology. We hope that this is a  useful tool in the support of a renewed, anticipatory  multilateralism in Geneva and beyond.

7
<<<END_PAGE_11>>>

<<<PAGE_12>>>
INTRODUCTION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 8

About the GESDA  Science Breakthrough Radar ®

A Swiss foundation with global reach and   a private-public partnership working from Geneva,  GESDA was started in September 2019 to develop  and promote anticipatory science and diplomacy  for greater impact and multilateral effectiveness.

The GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® is:  •	A new tool for multilateralism, informed discussion  and concerted action.  •	A single point of entry to catch up with the  unprecedented pace of progress in science  and technology.  •	A factual basis for eye-opening reflections on the  impacts of future scientific discoveries for people,  society and the planet.  •	An interactive, evolving instrument.

The GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® aims  to identify emerging research and map major  anticipated science advances at 5, 10 and 25 years.  These advances will potentially have a signifticant  impact on who we are as humans, how we are  going to live together and how we can ensure the  sustainability of our planet.

The trends and related breakthroughs are updated  annually through sustained engagement with the  global academic research community. They are  distributed across five Scientific Platforms:

1.	 Quantum Revolution & Advanced AI

2.	 Human Augmentation

3.	 Eco-Regeneration & Geoengineering

4. 	Science & Diplomacy

5.	 Knowledge Foundations
<<<END_PAGE_12>>>

<<<PAGE_13>>>
Each Scientific Platform contains   four community-based Pulses:

The Pulse of Science provides a summary of insights  from leading experts in the scientific community on  how research in different fields may advance over  the next 5, 10 and 25 years. It describes anticipated  science trends across 43 scientific emerging subjects,  covering a broad range of research areas in natural  sciences, engineering sciences, social sciences  and the humanities. These trends are not absolute  predictions — they may develop in unforeseen  ways — but noting their emergence makes an  important contribution to debates about the future  of humankind, and the role that the international  community can play within it.

The Pulse of Diplomacy provides perspectives from  the global diplomatic community — heads of states  and ministers, heads of international organisations,  policy-makers and diplomats — on the implications  of the anticipated science and technology advances  described in the GESDA Science Breakthrough  Radar®. Presented as selected proceedings from the  annual Geneva Science and Diplomacy Anticipation  Summit, the Pulse of Diplomacy describes the  impact of future breakthroughs on global issues such  as human rights, peace, security and prosperity.

The Pulse of Impact provides additional data  about investments in the private sector on selected  emerging topics. Whether science and technology  breakthroughs are successfully deployed from the lab

into the world depends to a certain extent — and can  be accelerated by — investments from the private  sector. The Pulse of Impact describes the latest data  about patent filings, start-up creation and private  investments in topics covered by the Radar.

The Pulse of Society, finally, provides an analysis  of the public perception and the debates on  mainstream media and social media on the topics   of the GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®.  Extending past analyses, the data presented in this  year’s edition reflects an enhanced and standardised  methodology which allows description of the  evolution of public sentiment over the years.

Pig Liver Transplantation

Pig Liver Transplantation

Breakthrough awards  Program

Breakthrough awards

Program

New Species

New Species

Real Estate  Decarbonization

Real Estate  Decarbonization

Ecology Conservation

Ecology Conservation

Conserving Aquatic  Biodiversity

Conserving Aquatic

China Green

China Green

Biodiversity

transformation

transformation

Institute of Oceanography

Institute of Oceanography

COP 16

COP 16

Ethanol as Biofuel

Ethanol as Biofuel

AI in Satellites

AI in Satellites

Lootah Biofuels

Lootah Biofuels

Urban Biodiversity

Urban Biodiversity

Conservation

Conservation

Space Exploration

Space Exploration

Food Innovation  Conference

Food Innovation

Conference

Meteor Study

Meteor Study

Trump, Ukraine Clean

Trump, Ukraine Clean

De-extinction Tech

De-extinction Tech

Energy System

Energy System

Critical Minerals

Critical Minerals

Nutrition

Nutrition

Breakthrough in Synthetic

Breakthrough in Synthetic

Innovation & Global

Innovation & Global

African Energy

African Energy

Biology & Therapeutics

Biology & Therapeutics

Impact of Smart Grids

Impact of Smart Grids

Development

Development

Nutrition

Nutrition

Crop Engineering

Crop Engineering

Indian Fossil Fuel

Marine Science

Indian Fossil Fuel

Marine Science

Pig Kidney Transplant

Development Pig Kidney Transplant

Total Ankle Replacements

Total Ankle Replacements

Development

Pathogen Study

Pathogen Study

Marine Biodiversity

Marine Biodiversity

Global Sustainable

Global Sustainable

Agriculture

Agriculture

Biodiversity Conservation

Biodiversity Conservation  Law

Law

Zoonotic Diseases

Zoonotic Diseases

Advances in Global

Advances in Global

Green Energy Transition

Green Energy Transition

Economy

Economy

Antibiotic Resistant

Antibiotic Resistant  Infections

Sustainable Agriculture

Sustainable Agriculture

Infections

India Energy

India Energy

Transformation

Transformation

Circular Economy

Circular Economy

AI in Energy Transition

AI in Energy Transition

9
<<<END_PAGE_13>>>

<<<PAGE_14>>>
INTRODUCTION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 10

The GESDA Pulse of Science

INTRODUCTION

1 	 Quantum Revolution  & Advanced AI

2 	 Human  Augmentation

3 	 Eco-Regeneration  & Geoengineering

4 	 Science  & Diplomacy

5 	 Knowledge  Foundations

DEEP DIVES AND LENSES

GESDA Science Lens:   The future of research

DEEP DIVE:   Augmenting sleep to slow down  biological ageing

GESDA Geopolitics Lens:   The geopolitics of science   and technology

DEEP DIVE:   Villars workshop report:   Planetarised Humanity

GESDA Philosophy Lens:   Planetarised Humanity

BREAKTHROUGH BRIEFS  Highlights in bold INVITED CONTRIBUTIONS

1.1 Artificial Intelligence 1.2 Quantum Computing 1.3 Unconventional Computing 1.4 Robotics and Embodied Intelligence  1.5 Extended Reality  1.6 Collective Intelligence

2.1 Cognitive Enhancement 2.2 Cell and Gene Engineering  2.3 Healthspan Extension 2.4 Future of Consciousness 2.5 Engineering Human Biology  2.6 Future Therapeutics

3.1 Energy Engineering 3.2 Ecology  3.3 Future Food Systems 3.4 Orbital Environment 3.5 Ocean Science  3.6 Pathogen Biology

4.1 Science-based Diplomacy 4.2 Economics 4.3 Futures Research 4.4 Digital Security 4.5 Behavioural Science of Groups  4.6 Language and Communication

5.1 Synthetic Biology 5.2 Science of the Origins of Life 5.3 Mathematics  5.4 Fungal Biology 5.5 Archaeology

Geneva Public Portal to Anticipation

The challenges of digital archiving

AI and the Law

Creators’ rights in the digital age

Digital twins

Assisted evolution and   ecosystem restoration

The world needs a new diplomatics

Affirmative ethics and   the new humanities

The challenges of urban  neurotechnology

Using reference genomes   to decode Earth’s biodiversity
<<<END_PAGE_14>>>

<<<PAGE_15>>>
11
<<<END_PAGE_15>>>

<<<PAGE_16>>>
INTRODUCTION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 12

Facts and figures

The GESDA Science  Breakthrough Radar®  examines 43 subjects  spanning five Scientific  Platforms. It presents the  outcomes of four community- driven “pulses” on scientific  topics — the Pulses of  Science, Diplomacy, Impact  and Society.

The Pulse of Science  details 348 anticipated  breakthroughs at 5, 10 and 25  years from now. In addition,  it contains three “lenses”  on philosophy, geopolitics  and science discussing  anticipated advances from  the perspective of three  fundamental questions  about the future of humanity,  society and our planet. 2390  scientists from 89 countries  have contributed to the Pulse  of Science since the Radar’s  creation in 2021. 757 scientists  from 58 countries contributed  to the Pulse of Science in  the 2026 GESDA Science  Breakthrough Radar®.

348 anticipated breakthroughs 2390 scientists 89 countries

The Pulse of Diplomacy  provides an overview of  10 discussions of anticipatory  science and diplomacy at  the 2024 Geneva Science  and Diplomacy Anticipation  Summit, building upon  insights from 77 speakers   and over 1000 participants.

The Pulse of Impact includes  an analysis of 30,114 companies  worldwide and patents in over  50 jurisdictions.

The Pulse of Society  includes an analysis of over  28 million social media posts  and 4 million articles in  mainstream media in order  to capture people’s opinions  about the scientific topics in  the five Scientific Platforms.
<<<END_PAGE_16>>>

<<<PAGE_17>>>
Geographical spread of contributors to the Pulse of Science since 2021

North America Switzerland

649

South America

109

Europe (without CH)

848

223

172

Africa  & Middle East

389

Russia, Asia & Oceania

13
<<<END_PAGE_17>>>

<<<PAGE_18>>>
INTRODUCTION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 14

Executive summary

The fifth edition of the GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®  employs GESDA’s unique science-anticipation methodology,  implemented in collaboration with leading researchers from  around the world, to provide brand-new perspectives on the  trends anticipated in science and technology development  over the next 5, 10 and 25 years.

Here we are pleased to share with you highlights from  this 2026 edition, presented to enable a forward-thinking,  anticipatory mindset for decision-making worldwide.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/2026-summary

Marilyne Andersen  Director General  GESDA
<<<END_PAGE_18>>>

<<<PAGE_19>>>
This year, we include scientists’ anticipatory  perspectives on a number of new topics, including  Ecology, Language and Communication,  Mathematics, and Fungal Biology. We also offer  expanded deep dives into key priority areas,  including:

•	 An in-depth report on Planetarised Humanity,  resulting from the third GESDA High-Level  Anticipation Workshop. This meeting,  held in spring 2024, brought together  researchers from 15 disciplines to discuss  novel scenarios and anticipate trends arising  from proliferating global connectivity, rapid  changes in environmental contexts and human  circumstances, and accelerating technological  innovation. See page 276.

•	 A spotlight on anticipated breakthroughs at the  interface of sleep and longevity research. This  report is just one of the outputs of a high‑level  meeting convened in Singapore in March by  GESDA, the ETH Singapore Centre and the  National University of Singapore. See page 94.

•	 The three GESDA Lenses on Science, Philosophy  and Geopolitics — see next column.

The Science Lens (page 22) offers a unique insight  into the future of research in science and technology.  The landscape for this activity is changing rapidly as  national priorities shift the context in which science  operates. Research ecosystems are increasingly  vulnerable to change, with scientists ill-equipped  for working in the transdisciplinary collaborations  that are becoming a necessary part of addressing  complex global challenges. New, robust and resilient  ecosystems must be created if the practice of science  and technology research is to take the strategic  opportunities for transformation that could make it  a vibrant tool that serves diverse global communities  and makes scientific benefits accessible to all.

The Philosophy Lens (page 286) summarises the  exploration by leading philosophers at GESDA’s third  Anticipation Workshop of issues arising from the  complex phenomenon of Planetarised Humanity.  Current and anticipated trends in science and  technology will inevitably transform what it means  to be human, how we can live together as societies  and how we can sustain our planet for all life forms.  Since humans are fundamentally linguistic creatures,  subtle changes in our words and concepts will  significantly influence how we define ourselves as we  build our future world. Building peaceful societies will  depend on maintaining shared language to foster  positive co-existence between humans, non‑human  intelligences and the natural environment on  a global scale. Moving beyond technical fixes to  rethink core ideas underlying our Planetarised  Humanity condition — about progress, nature and  well‑being — may offer the most fruitful path forward  for developing inclusive, global solutions to ensure  a sustainable future.

The Geopolitics Lens (page 210) provides an  in‑depth analysis of the future of scientific research  in a geopolitical context. Now a core currency in  international affairs, science and technology are  both shaping and shaped by geopolitics. There is  power in being able to shape, control and deploy  global research agendas, and expertise has become  a strategic asset. What’s more, there are many more  areas of strategic interest than ever before, including  fields such as AI, biotechnology and space. This report  highlights the challenges this situation creates for  science and technology research, and — maybe most  importantly — for its governance.

15
<<<END_PAGE_19>>>

<<<PAGE_20>>>
INTRODUCTION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 16

Highlights of the 2026 edition

Artificial Intelligence

Breakthroughs in AI over the past five years  have been particularly revolutionary for business  and education, but it currently dominates  global discourse in almost every area of human  endeavour, from science to art and from economics  to philosophy. Given the unprecedented pace  and erratic course of change, it is extraordinarily  difficult to know what’s coming next, save to say  that it is unlikely to be a smooth continuation of  current trajectories. The problem of prediction is  compounded by the growing consensus that new  approaches to building AI systems will be required  to significantly improve performance and achieve  adaptable, efficient and trustworthy AI platforms  that can be deployed broadly across society.

Research continues to explore how, for example,  the biology of the brain could provide inspiration for  more data-efficient learning approaches. Conversely,  AI could provide us with new approaches to  scientific discovery. However, the application of AI to  science requires careful consideration, supervision  and validation: in particular, it requires rich data  to function and can end up wasting resources by  going down avenues that human scientists would  instinctively identify as dead ends. It can also  readily come up with plausible explanations for  phenomena that turn out to have no basis in reality.  These are artefacts of the way today’s AI works: they  find and exploit correlations within datasets but  have no “common sense” appreciation of causal  relationships. Building AI that has a concept of the  world within which it exists (that is, a “world model”)  could significantly improve its capabilities, as could  endowing it with an understanding of causality.

However, even without such a radical overhaul, there  is already enough latent power in our AI systems  to cause significant further disruption to many  of society’s systems and infrastructures, and it is  vital that researchers, businesses, regulators and  policy‑makers work together to ensure that the  benefits of AI reach as wide a swathe of humanity as  possible — while limiting its negative impacts. AI is  already outperforming humans in a widening range  of tasks.

Cognitive Enhancement

The workings of the human brain present one of  the greatest mysteries in the entire cosmos. But  after millennia of “blunt instrument” approaches to  investigating the brain — relatively crude surgical or  pharmaceutical interventions — we are in a time of  radical innovation which should help to shed light  on how our minds work. We can use silicon-based  technologies, photons of light or chemical stimuli  to stimulate neural activity, alter brain states and  achieve therapeutic effects — some of which are truly  life‑changing.

For researchers in the field, these and other  developments promise rapid advances in our  understanding of the processes underlying thought,  memory and action. For example, AI can be used to  analyse huge datasets of neural signals, turn brain  activity into images and speech, and thus provide  insights into the fundamental mechanisms of  cognition. Future developments could lead to insights  about how neurons — more specifically, networks  of neurons, since cognitive processes appear to be  dynamic and distributed — encode information and  how their signals instigate or affect thought, impulse,  action and mood. Brain-computer interfaces are  available in many forms. Some allow artificial systems  to read and write brain signals, opening up the  possibility of learning to interpret and synthesise   brain signals.
<<<END_PAGE_20>>>

<<<PAGE_21>>>
That means these technologies have profound  real‑world applications, too. Read-outs from  deep‑brain implants can already turn an unexpressed  intention or desire to move a limb into a digital  command that can initiate the action. The implication  for those with paralysis or other neural restrictions  is clear: technology is making it possible to bypass  irreparably damaged neurological systems. Equally  exciting is the potential to perform “exogenous  cognition”, where mental tasks are offloaded to  external processors. This is already happening  to a limited extent, but future developments  could significantly augment our memories,  decision‑making and learning.

Engineering Human Biology

As synthetic human genomes, miniature human  organs grown in a lab and replicas of human embryos  have started to become part of today’s reality, we can  look forward to the considerable benefits for human  health and well‑being that our vast and multifaceted  ability to re-engineer human biology promises.  Cancer, cardiovascular disease, fertility roadblocks  and immune-system disorders are just some of  the possible targets of this research. Emerging  technologies such as AI, tissue engineering and  genome editing are converging to make a tangible  difference to the way we manage human biology.

Reprogramming cells and tissues, for example,  promises a means of reversing age-related loss  of function, of making cancer cells a target for  the immune system and even of growing new  tissues and organs to order. The thriving field of  “organoids” — lab-grown mini-organs — is heading  towards growing replica kidneys or bone marrow  for transplant. There are even “mini-brains”, grown  in culture, that promise to help elucidate the  pathways associated with dementia.

All these developments, however, cast ethical, legal  and regulatory shadows over our current governance  frameworks, and it will be essential that they are  properly accompanied by the fields of philosophy  and ethics in parallel to legislative developments.  A quarter of a century ago, researchers began liaising  with policy‑makers, regulators and the media to  prepare the ground for babies who would have three  “parents”, one being a donor who would ensure the  child was born free of lethal mitochondrial diseases.  Those babies were finally born this year through the  research conducted by scientists contributing to the  GESDA Radar. Now a similar effort must begin for the  many transformative advances in engineering human  biology that will come over the next quarter  of a century.

17
<<<END_PAGE_21>>>

<<<PAGE_22>>>
INTRODUCTION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 18

Ecology

There can hardly be a more pressing issue facing  humanity than our ecological challenges. Shifts  in climate are resulting in changes to all Earth’s  ecosystems and even the creation of new ones,   as populations of various species are forced to share  habitats in unprecedented ways. Such scenarios only  increase the likelihood of new human pandemics,  caused by mutations in animal-borne viruses and  other pathogens. This is made even more likely by  the fact that humans are themselves introducing  new species to regions where they did not previously  exist, whether accidentally or purposefully. As a  consequence, ecologists are seeing many groups   of organisms undergoing rapid evolution in response  to human activity.

However, researchers are also pioneering a slew  of exciting innovations that have the potential to  greatly improve our understanding of ecology. New  genetic‑analysis tools, cutting-edge chemical sensors,  satellite monitoring and underwater acoustic probes  are just some of the technologies gathering data  that can inform modelling, planning and action.  Furthermore, greater appreciation of the value of  Indigenous and local knowledge is opening up  opportunities to gain new insights into ecological  processes.

Challenges remain, of course. One is making the  most of scientific advances that seek to modify  biological organisms to control disease while avoiding  undesirable outcomes. Another is creating ecological  tools that factor in hard-to-model phenomena such  as tipping points that can lead to irreversible, runaway  climate change and multi-scale, multisystem effects  such as those produced by mass human migration or  economic, social and political changes.

Pathogen Biology

Many lessons have been learned from humanity’s  experience with COVID-19. However, there is still  much to do to prepare us for the next pandemic, as  experts agree it is a case of “when”, not “if”.  Our collective response to COVID-19 didn’t just help  us overcome the virus: it helped us develop crucial  infrastructure for the logistics of healthcare delivery,  as well as a suite of tools, such as mRNA vaccines,  that will be vital to treating a broad range of diseases  and conditions. Other emerging tools — rapid  genome sequencing, immunological profiling, phage  therapy, surveillance technologies and AI — will help  us monitor, prevent or contain future outbreaks   of disease.

Further threats from viruses, bacteria and other  pathogens such as fungi remain very much on the  radar of a large group of researchers. AI is proving  particularly useful, helping to characterise molecules  that are key to the infectivity of pathogens and to  analyse genomic data that sheds light on the likely  outcomes of infection. It is vital for global health,  though, that the benefits of these breakthroughs are  felt far beyond the borders of the rich countries that  can afford to carry out such cutting-edge research —  especially as much of the raw data comes from lower-  and middle-income countries. The most effective  approach to building global resistance to pathogens  will be decentralised, based on a blend of formal and  informal health intelligence and built on mutual trust  and partnership across nations and regions.
<<<END_PAGE_22>>>

<<<PAGE_23>>>
The geopolitics of science and technology

For most of the 20th century, only a few specific  scientific fields or technological capabilities were  considered to be of direct military value, such as  nuclear physics and the ability to enrich nuclear  material. Today, a much broader range of scientific  knowledge and technological capabilities, from  general-purpose AI to quantum technologies and  synthetic biology, are seen as strategic assets to be  guarded, leveraged or denied. The ability to shape,  control and deploy advanced technologies is a key  factor of global relevance, competitiveness and  influence. As a result, states are adopting measures  such as export restrictions on semiconductor  technology or computer chips, tight control over data  pipelines and restrictions on the flow of knowledge  and expertise across borders.

Weaponising the tools and resources of science and  technology has significant knock-on effects for those  in the knowledge-creation sectors. Scientific progress  was once driven by international collaboration:  now suspicion and strategic competition threaten  to silo knowledge and capacity. There are growing  restrictions on recruitment from abroad, and working  in cross-border partnerships is becoming far more  difficult, particularly in sensitive domains like AI,  quantum computing and biotechnology.

This changing research climate is causing  governments to innovate in their approaches to  science, technology and related industries — striving  to reduce their vulnerability to chokepoints. China,  Brazil and India have all implemented new strategic  programmes designed to mitigate the effects of  export controls, brain drains and resource shortages,  for instance. Looking ahead, maintaining spaces  for exchange and dialogue will be crucial — not  only for the progress of science but to mitigate and  contain the global threats posed by certain of their  applications. .

19
<<<END_PAGE_23>>>

<<<PAGE_24>>>
INTRODUCTION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 20

Language and Communication

Language is a core human capacity and perhaps  a unique evolutionary step in the history of life on  Earth. No other species makes use of such a large  and diverse set of rich and complex languages.  Moreover, languages are always changing — and  they are doing so rapidly now, due to both social and  technological pressures. How will our extraordinary  ability to exchange information through a structured  recombination of linguistic elements evolve in  coming years?

It is a time of opportunity and threat: both are  found, for instance, in the significant progress of AI’s  large language models (LLMs). Across the globe,  people are interacting every day with machines  using natural language, and the ways in which  this will affect human culture and language into  the future are unknown. This might be a way of  preserving threatened languages and may help us  better understand how language is learned and  represented in the human mind. Or it might allow  majority languages to be exploited in perpetuating  or exacerbating economic, social and political  inequalities.

Against this backdrop, language is undoubtedly   a political issue. Thanks to unprecedented internal  and international migration, we are in an age of rising  multilingualism. At the same time, many minority  languages are under threat, with some languages  being forcibly suppressed in certain regions. As  researchers recognise the multifaceted nature of  language there is a new urgency to ensure that  research in human language, the communication  strategies of non-human animals and the evolution of  both fields reflects the geopolitical importance   of the subject.

Planetarised Humanity

In an era marked by unprecedented global  interconnectedness, increasing technological  capabilities and pressing environmental challenges,  the future of human identity and social relationships  is poised for radical transformation at a planetary  level — an emerging complex phenomenon that  GESDA has called Planetarised Humanity.

The advent of digital technologies, AI and virtual  reality are blurring the boundaries between individual  and collective cognition, reshaping our self-concept  and social roles. The emergence of hybrid social  networks where humans and artificial agents  collaborate and co-evolve may create new forms   of kinship: while emotional bonds with non-human  agents could profoundly impact human-to-human  relationships, leading to the digital displacement  of traditional community structures and practices,  technology-mediated experiences may also facilitate  deeper levels of interindividual comprehension and  empathy. In parallel, anticipated technoscientific  breakthroughs over the next quarter-century  may provide governance models apt to develop  with emergent social norms and technological  capabilities. Technological developments, particularly  in collective‑intelligence platforms and data-driven  systems, are expected to play a crucial role in enabling  new forms of participatory decision-making and  algorithmic consensus-building mechanisms across  diverse stakeholders, incorporating elements of  common narratives in fostering cohesion across  diverse value systems.
<<<END_PAGE_24>>>

<<<PAGE_25>>>
Planetarised Humanity draws on basic knowledge  in the social sciences and humanities to capture  and shape these transformative shifts in our human  relational condition — in how we understand  ourselves, govern our societies and interact with the  world around us — that are induced by accelerating  socio-techno-ecological co-evolution. The situation  demands the formation of new approaches,   concepts, frameworks and methodologies that  challenge conventional boundaries. We must  anticipate the future of these disciplines if we are  to integrate science and technology advances with  anticipated transformations in human values and  societal needs from a planetary perspective for a  flourishing, shared future.

Mathematics

Much of the modern world — and its future  development — depends on mathematical  innovations. Various branches of mathematics, such  as calculus, algebra and statistics, underpin the  management of all global economies — all of the  activity on the internet and the development of AI,  for example. Its usefulness goes beyond assisting  day‑to‑day life: it is proving essential to modelling,  managing and protecting our existence on the  planet. But we do not yet have all the mathematics  we need.

The detailed behaviour of the ocean‑climate‑human  system, for instance, is beyond existing mathematical  models, as does the economic quantification of  “ecosystem services”, characterised by the direct or  indirect benefits humans derive from ecosystems,  which could accelerate the protection of vital aspects  of our planetary environment. It seems likely that  innovations such as AI that assist mathematicians in  their work will help supply these and other insights.  Mathematics is also set to help create more equitable  societies with greater engagement in democratic  processes. That is because mathematical tools are  enabling the analysis of human behaviour: alongside  advances in neuroscience, these could create  powerful new opportunities to steer societies towards  happier and healthier futures.

In its more traditional role as a tool for scientists,  mathematics is finding new and fruitful applications,  in particular in biology, where complexity and lack  of clean data has historically made mathematically  driven analysis more difficult. New collaborations  between mathematicians and biologists, building  comprehensive records of the characteristics,  composition and properties of human cells, for  instance, promise a coming revolution in healthcare  and fundamental biology.

21
<<<END_PAGE_25>>>

<<<PAGE_26>>>
SCIENCE LENS

22

SCIENCE LENS:

The future of research

Sabina Leonelli  Professor of Philosophy and History of Science  and Technology at the Technical University of  Munich, Germany

Richard Williams  Department of Science, Technology   and Society, Technical University of Munich

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-lens-sci

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®
<<<END_PAGE_26>>>

<<<PAGE_27>>>
The landscape of international science and  technology is rapidly evolving, creating  unprecedented opportunities alongside  significant risks for global society. As technological  developments accelerate, the need for anticipation  in science diplomacy becomes increasingly critical  to ensure that innovations serve humanity’s  collective interests while mitigating potential  harms. In this report, we outline trends and  challenges underpinning the process of research  in science and technology. We also discuss some  of the emerging trends and challenges in scientific  practice that we estimate will have major impacts  on research and technology, and thus international  society and international diplomacy, in the future.

Trends and challenges within scientific practice

Modern scientific research faces fundamental  challenges that threaten its ability to address  complex global problems effectively. The current  innovation climate often prioritises speed and  quantity over quality and equity, creating “fragile  science” — research ecosystems vulnerable to rapid  change and dominated by narrow approaches that  may not adapt well to future uncertainties.

The concentration of research capabilities in  well‑resourced institutions and regions has created a  critical diversity deficit. When scientific communities  lack varied perspectives, methodologies and  expertise, they become less resilient and less capable  of producing robust solutions to multifaceted  challenges. This problem is compounded by  persistent inequities that prevent many talented  researchers and communities from participating fully  in global knowledge production, particularly those  in the majority world, who often possess unique  insights and access to critical natural resources.

Governance structures around scientific openness  and collaboration remain fragmented, creating  barriers to effective international cooperation. While  Open Science principles advocate for universal access  to research, practical decisions about who can access  what knowledge under which conditions often  favour well-established institutions and corporations.  The rise of AI throughout research ecosystems  exemplifies this challenge, as proprietary systems  and exclusive access to computational resources risk  creating new forms of knowledge inequality.

The geopolitical context for science has become  increasingly complex and fragmented, with  international cooperation facing pressures from  nationalist policies and security concerns. Traditional  post-World War Two frameworks for scientific  collaboration are proving inadequate for addressing  contemporary challenges that require rapid,  coordinated responses across national boundaries.  The cosmopolitan nature of science faces ongoing  disruptions to the geopolitical landscape, rewriting  central assumptions about international solidarity,  focus on public interest, transnational partnerships  and open exchange of information that previously  allowed science diplomacy to transcend political  divides.

Finally, current approaches to research assessment,  education and skills training often fail to prepare  scientists and policy‑makers for the transdisciplinary  collaboration necessary to address complex global  challenges. Standardised evaluation methods may  not capture the value of diverse research approaches,  while educational systems struggle to balance  specialised technical training with broader ethical  and social competencies.

23
<<<END_PAGE_27>>>

<<<PAGE_28>>>
SCIENCE LENS

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 24

Strategic opportunities for transformation

Five key opportunities exist to create more effective,  equitable and resilient global research systems.

Long-term intelligent technology  development requires shifting focus from rapid  deployment to sustainable innovation. This means  investing in comprehensive impact assessments that  evaluate social and environmental consequences  before technologies reach widespread adoption.  Organisations committed to responsible innovation  should receive recognition and support, while  initiatives that harness technologies like AI for  environmental solutions should include systematic  studies of their own impacts.

Embedded ethics must become central to all  scientific training and practice. Rather than treating  ethics as an add-on consideration, research  institutions should integrate ethical reasoning  throughout their programmes, ensuring that  scientists understand how values inevitably shape  their work. This includes specialised training in  data ethics as fundamental to research design and  implementation.

Inclusive infrastructure and education  development goes beyond building technological  systems to creating sustainable support networks.  Digital infrastructures alone cannot bridge  divides; they must be accompanied by ongoing  consultation, engagement and training programmes  that serve the most vulnerable users. Long-term  funding models should prioritise maintenance and  continuous community involvement in system  design and evolution.

Participatory governance involves establishing  new forms of cooperation between public and  private stakeholders that emphasise extensive,  ongoing public engagement in both technology  development and implementation. Communities of  practice that bring together researchers, users and  other stakeholders on equal terms can ensure that  technological advancement serves genuine public  interests.

Open research and innovation ecosystems require  fostering cultures where sharing resources, data  and skills becomes attractive and sustainable. This  includes encouraging transparency in upstream  research projects so that researchers can connect  and collaborate even when proprietary concerns limit  data-sharing.

Six critical domains for action

AI and the digital divide represents perhaps the  most urgent challenge, as AI development reshapes  global power dynamics. The transition to quantum  computing within the next decade will create  massive computational advantages for those with  access while potentially leaving others further  behind. Universal connectivity remains elusive, with  many regions dependent on private corporations  for basic digital infrastructure. With AI systems  becoming more sophisticated, concerns about safety,  transparency and democratic governance intensify,  while the convenience of automated research tools  risks creating new forms of scientific dependency.

Space-technology governance faces mounting  pressures as space becomes crowded with  competing interests. Opportunities for resource  extraction and solar-power generation in space offer  economic potential while raising questions about  environmental responsibility and equitable access.  With the satellite population expected to reach  100,000 by 2030, collision risks and space debris  threaten to make orbital regions unusable.  Current governance frameworks, designed for  a bipolar world, prove inadequate for today’s  multipolar space environment.
<<<END_PAGE_28>>>

<<<PAGE_29>>>
Responsible and equitable environmental  technology examines how geopolitics can leverage  environmental technologies for pressing issues like  droughts, ecosystem collapse and food insecurity.  Advances in genetic manipulation provide powerful  capabilities for developing resilient crops and  addressing nutritional deficiencies, yet raise safety  concerns about long-term ecological impacts and  dual-use potential. Success depends on integrating  Indigenous and local knowledge systems that  have been historically marginalised in large-scale  innovation processes.

Health technology and human well‑being is being  transformed by neurotechnology, digital health  systems and new approaches to evidence‑based  medicine. These developments enable less invasive  treatments and preventive approaches, while  raising concerns about privacy, autonomy and the  medicalisation of human experience. The COVID‑19  pandemic demonstrated both the potential and  limitations of digital health solutions, highlighting  the need for more equitable approaches that address  systemic inequalities.

Ocean science for ocean health confronts urgent  threats to marine ecosystems from climate change  and extractive industries. While technology-based  conservation strategies offer hope for protecting coral  reefs and marine biodiversity, they require genuine  collaboration with local communities and social  scientists. Deep-sea exploitation threatens species  that may disappear before they are discovered,  while fragmented conservation efforts compete  for limited resources.

Aligning military use of science with international  humanitarian law examines challenges  of militarising emerging technologies for  national‑security purposes. Technologies now move  fluidly between military and civilian applications  throughout their life cycles, making traditional  dual‑use frameworks inadequate. The “boomerang  effect” ensures that military innovations eventually  return to civilian contexts, often in the form of  enhanced surveillance capabilities and militarised  governance approaches that may threaten  democratic values.

Building resilient research ecosystems

The path forward requires cultivating research  ecosystems that can adapt to uncertainty while  serving diverse global needs. This means investing  in robust infrastructures and human capabilities  that can accommodate changing requirements  across different communities and contexts. Greater  access to these resources enables more inclusive  technological development that bridges digital  divides and meets varied social needs.

Building public trust in science requires moving  beyond simple appeals to scientific authority toward  demonstrating the value of scientific processes for  governing disagreement constructively. Science  diplomacy can foster narratives that emphasise  evidence‑based inquiry and openness to criticism  rather than demanding unquestioning acceptance  of particular findings.

The ultimate goal is creating an international  research community capable of developing  technologies that diverse global communities  find genuinely useful, regardless of their specific  circumstances. In an era of fragmenting geopolitics,  this requires balancing opportunities for beneficial  innovation with careful management of risks  to security, human rights and environmental  sustainability. Success demands anticipatory  approaches that cultivate trust and cooperation  among nations, corporations and international  organisations committed to making scientific  benefits accessible to all.

25
<<<END_PAGE_29>>>

<<<PAGE_30>>>
INTRODUCTION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 26

INVITED CONTRIBUTION:

Spotlight on the Pulse of Society:  Geneva Public Portal to  Anticipation

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/portal

Sarah Kenderdine   Professor and Head of the Laboratory  for Experimental Museology at  EPFL, the Swiss Federal Institute  of Technology in Lausanne

Niniane Paeffgen  Programme Lead for the Public Portal  to Anticipation at GESDA
<<<END_PAGE_30>>>

<<<PAGE_31>>>
GESDA prides itself on working as a “do tank”  as well as a think tank. To illustrate GESDA’s  commitment to this active philosophy, we present  here, at the beginning of the 2026 Radar, a report  on our ambitious and unprecedented experiment  in public science engagement: the Geneva  Public Portal to Anticipation. This is part of our  “Pulse of Society” initiative, which explores public  engagement with science and technology.

The Geneva Public Portal to Anticipation, an  immersive installation, was at the heart of the Swiss  Pavilion at the 2025 World Expo in Osaka, Japan.   It was born from a vision of the GESDA Foundation  and conceived and developed by EPFL’s Laboratory  for Experimental Museology (eM+), with the aim of  translating the GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®  into a public experience.

In the first six months, the Geneva Public Portal  to Anticipation had around 500,0000 visitors, who  collectively crafted visions of possible futures across  5-, 10- and 25-year horizons. Since many visions  emerged from group co-creation, total participants  are estimated at around 1 million. Backed by millions  of data points from visitor selections on interactive  touch screens and nearly 2000 qualitative surveys, the  portal gives us unique, actionable insight into how  people relate to the science shaping their tomorrow.

Here’s what they’ve told us:

Positive feelings towards the future of science

A majority of users reported loving the experience  (91 per cent*), as it fostered a sense of agency and  invited them to explore the future in an experimental  way. Japanese-speaking participants (85 per cent  of total users) most frequently associated “joy”  and “interest” with the future of science. English  speakers echoed this, choosing “joy” and “trust”.  Even more compelling: 94 per cent believe scientific  breakthroughs will positively influence their own life  paths. This suggests a public that is not only optimistic  but emotionally invested in science’s trajectories.

27
<<<END_PAGE_31>>>

<<<PAGE_32>>>
INTRODUCTION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 28

Human futures have health at the forefront

When it comes to scientific curiosity, the public’s gaze  turns inward. Human Augmentation emerged as the  most selected Radar theme, with Lifespan Extension  at the top. In other words, the future people want  to know about is one where science touches their  own biology — prolonging, enhancing and perhaps  transforming life itself.

But curiosity doesn’t stop at the self. Qualitative  responses reveal strong interest in health, medicine,  Future Food Systems and planetary regeneration  (Earth repair). There is growing awareness that  human futures are entangled with the planet’s  future. As one visitor reflected: “I gained a deeper  understanding of how the environment and  economy might change in the future.”

From passive spectators to active agents

Perhaps most encouraging of all, 90 per cent of  respondents reported feeling empowered to take  part in shaping the future as a result of engaging  with the Portal. It indicates a public ready to move  from anticipation to action. The question that should  concern us now is how we can enable collective  action.

At its core, the Geneva Public Portal to Anticipation  is not just an interactive exhibit. It is an invitation  to imagine. By blending science anticipation with  speculative thinking, the portal empowers the  public to co-create future narratives grounded in  the insights of more than 2000 scientists on the  breakthroughs likely to shape our world. These visions  often stretch beyond linear progress to encompass  poetic, surprising or radically hopeful alternatives.  In doing so, the portal reveals not only what people  expect from science but what they hope for: futures  shaped by values, imagination and a striving for  the collective good. This aligns with the portal’s  underlying philosophy of using speculative futures  to stimulate imagination, invite cultural dialogue and  ultimately inspire action. It is science communication  reimagined — not as one-way instruction but as a  platform for shared anticipation and action.

True to GESDA’s vision, the experience is not only   a situated encounter at the World Expo but has been  an ongoing online engagement as well.

Next: a global dialogue with society   on emerging science As GESDA and eM+ prepare to deploy smaller  satellite versions of the portal around the world,  the vision expands. The aim will be to seed a global  conversation on emerging science grounded in  cultural nuance and citizen insight. These satellites  will not only deepen cross-cultural insights but help  to build a “Pulse of Society”, a dynamic barometer   of public sentiment, anticipation and hopes.

* Preliminary estimate based on data   as of mid-July 2025; final figures may vary.
<<<END_PAGE_32>>>

<<<PAGE_33>>>
29
<<<END_PAGE_33>>>

<<<PAGE_34>>>
INTRODUCTION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 30

Acknowledgments

The building of the 2026 GESDA Science  Breakthrough Radar® was made possible through  the engagement of a large number of institutions,  networks and individuals. Together, this has enabled  the development of the Radar as a leading tool for  anticipatory science diplomacy in the service of  multilateralism.

We would like to express our thanks to GESDA’s  Founders and Public Contributors: the Swiss  Confederation, the Republic and Canton of Geneva,  and the City of Geneva.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-com

We are profoundly grateful to   GESDA’s Academic Forum led by:

and including our Science Anticipation   Committee Chairs:

Michael O. Hengartner   President of the ETH Board

Pascale Fung  Artifical Intelligence  Anticipation Committee

Sabrina Maniscalco  Quantum Computing  Anticipation Committee

Charles Roques-Carmes  Unconventional Computing   Anticipation Committee

Johannes Schemmel  Unconventional Computing   Anticipation Committee

Lena Smirnova   Unconventional Computing   Anticipation Committee

Ángel Goñi-Moreno   Unconventional Computing   Anticipation Committee

Minoru Asada   Robotics and Embodied Intelligence  Anticipation Committee

Karthik Ramani   Extended Reality  Anticipation Committee

Geoff Mulgan   Collective Intelligence  Anticipation Committee

Jaimie Henderson  Cognitive Enhancement   Anticipation Committee

Robin Lovell-Badge   Engineering Human Biology   Anticipation Committee

Vera Gorbonova   Healthspan Extension  Anticipation Committee

Itzhak Fried   Future of Consciousness   Anticipation Committee

Michael Lobritz   Future Therapeutics  Anticipation Committee

Mercedes Maroto-Valer   Energy Engineering  Anticipation Committee

Sandra Díaz   Ecology  Anticipation Committee

Nam-Hai Chua   Future Food Systems  Anticipation Committee
<<<END_PAGE_34>>>

<<<PAGE_35>>>
Lindy Elkins-Tanton   Orbital Environment  Anticipation Committee

Sabine Gollner   Ocean Science  Anticipation Committee

Christian Happi   Pathogen Biology  Anticipation Committee

Didier Wernli   Science-based Diplomacy   Anticipation Committee

Roland Bouffanais   Science-based Diplomacy   Anticipation Committee

Jayati Ghosh   Economics  Anticipation Committee

Sarah Pink   Futures Research  Anticipation Committee

Linus Gasser   Digital Security  Anticipation Committee

Mina Cikara   Behavioural Science of Groups   Anticipation Committee

Jennifer Culbertson   Language and Communication   Anticipation Committee

Patrick Cai   Synthetic Biology  Anticipation Committee

We would also like to thank the Science  Anticipation Committee members and contributors,  acknowledged by name throughout the report,   who provide the deep expertise at the foundation   of GESDA’s work.

Betül Kaçar   Science of the Origins of Life   Anticipation Committee

Minhyong Kim   Mathematics  Anticipation Committee

Joseph Heitman   Fungal Biology  Anticipation Committee

Leah Cowen   Fungal Biology  Anticipation Committee

Silvian Fachard   Archaeology  Anticipation Committee

Anna-Sapfo Malaspinas   Archaeology  Anticipation Committee

Finally, the project team, led by Martin Müller   and Sophie Gilbert, would like to thank:

Gérard Escher  Manuel Gustavo Isaac  Marion Mercier  GESDA

Michael Brooks (Editor)  Sumit Paul-Choudhury  Scientification LLP

Scott David  Adrian Shawcross  Karmen King  + extended team  Shapeable

Martin Müller   Executive Director of Science  Anticipation at GESDA

Sophie Gilbert   Programme Lead for the GESDA  Science Breakthrough Radar® at GESDA

31
<<<END_PAGE_35>>>

<<<PAGE_36>>>
INTRODUCTION

ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

32 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

GESDA SCIENTIFIC PLATFORMS:

The GESDA   Scientific Platforms

The GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® anticipates frontier  research in five fundamental domains, or Scientific Platforms.  In this section, leading experts contribute insights that identify and  explain emerging research in each of these domains, anticipating  major anticipated science advances at 5, 10 and 25 years.

All citations in this section can be found in the resources  tab on the digital platform using the URL or QR code below:

go.gesda.global/resources
<<<END_PAGE_36>>>

<<<PAGE_37>>>
© 2024 by GESDA is licensed under CC BY-NC-ND 4.0.

1 2 3 4 5

QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

Pages 208–273  Pages 274–331  Pages 154–207 Pages 92–153 Pages 34–91

HUMAN AUGMENTATION

ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

33
<<<END_PAGE_37>>>

<<<PAGE_38>>>
PLATFORM INTRODUCTION QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

PLATFORM INTRODUCTION QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

34

SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM

1

Quantum Revolution  & Advanced AI

Information matters now more than ever,   and the way we use information is changing fast.  A number of recent breakthroughs in AI and  quantum computing are promising to change  how information is stored, transmitted, processed  and exploited. Radical new forms of computing  and innovations in robotics are likely to create  world-changing capabilities in the near future.  Advances in hardware design are transforming our  experience of reality, and collaborations between  AI and human minds are enabling new forms of  collective intelligence. In this section, we anticipate,  explain and explore the various ways in which  advances in novel information technologies may  evolve and impact our world.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®
<<<END_PAGE_38>>>

<<<PAGE_39>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE (pages 34–83)

Containing deep insights into anticipated advances  associated with Quantum Revolution & Advanced  AI over the next 5, 10 and 25 years, the GESDA  Pulse of Science provides the expert opinions  of leading researchers in fields related to the  information sciences, such as AI, quantum and other  unconventional computing, robotics, collective  intelligence and extended reality.

PULSE OF DIPLOMACY (pages 84–85)

The GESDA Pulse of Diplomacy captures the latest  discussions between diplomats and scientists at the  2024 Geneva Science and Diplomacy Anticipation  Summit on topics related to quantum computing.

PULSE OF IMPACT (pages 86–87)

Current investment trends and dynamics of  company creation highlight quantum computing  as an increasingly important topic. The GESDA  Pulse of Impact provides data detailing  private‑sector investment, intellectual‑property  activity and company creation in the area of  quantum computing since 2000.

PULSE OF SOCIETY (pages 88–91)

Powered by AI, the GESDA Pulse of Society’s  network and dynamic sentiment analysis of both  mainstream and social media reveals macro- and  micro-trends in public opinion around the world on  topics relating to non-conventional computing and  emerging applications of information processing.

35
<<<END_PAGE_39>>>

<<<PAGE_40>>>
QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI PULSE OF SCIENCE

QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI PULSE OF SCIENCE

36

1.1

Artificial Intelligence

CHAIR:   Pascale Fung

Senior Director of Al Research at Meta FAIR;  Chair Professor in the department of electronic  and computer engineering at Hong Kong  University of Science and Technology

CONTRIBUTORS:   Kyunghyun Cho, Yejin Choi, Shirley Ho,  Yann LeCun, Hang Li, Jitendra Malik,  Bernhard Scholköpf, Maosong Sun, Eric Xing,  Jun Zhu

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Artificial Intelligence (AI) aims to produce  intelligence using algorithms and machines.  This includes systems that perceive and analyse  their environment, take decisions, communicate  and learn. In the past decade, AI has reached major  milestones and is poised to disrupt societal norms.1

Recent progress stems from machine learning  (ML), which enables computers to discover patterns  in data.2 Within ML, deep learning — neural  networks loosely inspired by the brain — has driven  most breakthroughs.3 These models now match or  surpass human performance in many tasks: image  recognition (2015), winning at Go (2016), predicting  protein structures (2022) and enabling chatbots  with powerful language skills.

The rise of generative AI has further transformed the  field. Unlike earlier systems, which primarily classified  or predicted, generative models create new text,  images, music, code and even video. Tools such as  chatbots, image generators and coding assistants  are now integrated into search engines and office  software, with early “agents” capable of performing  economically useful tasks with limited supervision.

This progress has been enabled by abundant data,  vast computing power and model designs that scale.  But challenges remain: these systems are opaque,  energy-intensive and prone to bias, misinformation  and “hallucinations.” Generative AI also raises  concerns about intellectual property, misinformation  and impacts on education, creative industries and the  future of work.

New approaches are needed for AI that is efficient,  adaptable and trustworthy. Meanwhile, powerful  AI is already here, and society must prepare for its  far-reaching consequences in how humans create,  reason and interact with machines.
<<<END_PAGE_40>>>

<<<PAGE_41>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS

The field of AI has seen rapid progress in recent  years, with particularly significant advances being  seen in AI that generates text, images and video  based on learning from online data. However, there  is great scope for further advances. Large language  models (LLMs), for example, embody cultural  knowledge but are inadequate in causal reasoning  and robustness. Building on current success, the  Future of generative AI appears to be in ever‑wider  applications and dealing with architectural  gaps: transformer architectures are powerful for  predicting tokens and pixels, but inadequate  for processing continuous, high-dimensional  natural signals in the real world. Progress in AI  also requires grounding models in physical reality  beyond text: World-modelling and embodied AI  are vital for true intelligence. This will enable an AI  system to incorporate representations of a physical  environment, complete with physical parameters  that might constrain or otherwise influence its  output. Intelligence emerges from embodiment and  active interaction with the environment, drawing  from biological and developmental insights. Greater  consideration of real-world situations is likely to  help AI for science, which is currently growing in its  influence on the scientific endeavour. AI shows great  promise for scientific discovery but faces challenges  in scientific data generation and abstraction. Future  advances depend on more efficient data use  and new learning paradigms that move beyond  brute‑force scaling. Breakthroughs in AI foundations  may be necessary to fulfil the potential currently  seen in the field, while AI safety and alignment with  human values are paramount for societal trust and  beneficial deployment: considering the broader  social and educational implications of AI is critical for  responsible progress.

ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

1.1 	 Artificial Intelligence

SUB-TOPICS

1.1.1	 Future of generative AI

1.1.2	 World-modelling  and embodied AI

1.1.3	 AI for science

1.1.4	 AI foundations

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

Within the sub-topics covered by Artificial  Intelligence, the Future of generative AI is  perceived to be already mature, and there is a  high awareness about its effects. Even though the  field is seen as transformative, its high maturity  and relatively clear impact limits its Anticipation  Potential scores. Significant advances in  World‑modelling and embodied AI, on the other  hand, are still close to 10 years away and highly  uncertain. Finally, work on AI foundations is likely  to continue to evolve and impact other fields. AI for  science is the topic where the need for multilateral  cooperation is highest in order to drive progress  and harness future opportunities.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/ai

37
<<<END_PAGE_41>>>

<<<PAGE_42>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

PULSE OF SCIENCE

QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

38

Artificial Intelligence

1.1.1 Future of generative AI

The most widely appreciated progress in AI has come from models able  to generate new content, such as text, images, video, audio and software  code. Generative AI, as the field is known, is underpinned by extremely large  models trained on enormous text and image datasets scraped from the  internet.

Current generative AI research is heavily reliant on brute-force scaling with  ever-larger datasets and computing power, raising questions about  sustainability and future data limitations. There is a call for architectural  innovation enabling AI to learn efficiently from modest data,4 drawing from  concepts in human learning and cognitive science.

Approaches to cope with data limitations include generating synthetic data,  employing new data diversification algorithms5,6 and developing smarter,  data‑efficient learning paradigms. However, progress in generative AI must  overcome issues with robustness and generalisation by moving from “vanilla”  data synthesis to creating data that does not yet exist online, and by exploring  alternative architectures to transformers. The field must also avoid over-fixation  on current trends (brute-force scaling) and foster unconventional collaborations,  especially between academia and industry, to drive fundamental change.

It is important to emphasise that ethical considerations, safety and alignment  of generative models with societal values should be foundational to further  adoption.7 It is also important to keep technical progress aligned with societal  needs and to raise critical questions about long-term future directions of the field.8

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Generative models  continue to improve

Research achieves  continued improvement  of generative models  using current  architectures (such as  transformers), focusing  on better data efficiency  and robustness. There  is widespread use of  synthetic data generation  to supplement limited  datasets. Significant  advances in alternative  learning paradigms  beyond brute-force  scaling are made, with  new architectures  appearing that enable  learning from smaller,  more diverse datasets.  AI models begin to  synthesise truly novel  data, expanding creativity  and generalisation.

Generative AI incorporates  different kinds of  information

Generative AI incorporates  multimodal and  grounded information  more effectively,  potentially integrating  embodied learning and  world models. Ethical  alignment mechanisms  reach practical  deployment, fostering  greater societal trust.

Generative-AI systems  display adaptive creativity

Further progress enables  generative-AI systems to  display adaptive creativity  and self-supervised  scenario generation,  facilitating breakthroughs  in science, the arts and  society. Fundamental  innovations reshape  collaborative research  paradigms between  academia and industry.
<<<END_PAGE_42>>>

<<<PAGE_43>>>
Artificial Intelligence

1.1.2 World-modelling and embodied AI

Despite their impressive capabilities, leading AI models understand  relatively little about the world around them. This is because the text  and image data they are trained on contains only indirect knowledge  of physical reality. This limits their ability to both understand and act in  dynamic real-world environments.

Internal world models, which allow an agent to predict environmental states  given actions, are central to intelligence, supporting zero-shot generalisation  and planning.9 Embodied intelligence, which is intelligence that is rooted  in the connection between perception, action and reality, can be likened to  evolutionary and child-development processes: human children’s learning,  viewed as “scientists in the crib”, provides a model for active exploration and  self-directed experiment in intelligent systems. However, current text-based  models lack the necessary grounding and are orders of magnitude less  data‑efficient than humans. Real-world, multimodal data is critical for building  future models, and robotics offers a promising path: here, the integration of  language, vision, memory and manipulation capabilities supports hierarchical  planning and lifelong learning.10

In the long term, AI robots may develop complex self-awareness and  seamlessly acquire new skills from rich sensory experience, moving closer to  human-like capabilities. Safety boundaries must be set, though. For example,  reinforcement-learning strategies that incentivise pure survival should  be avoided to ensure that AI acts as a tool aligned with human interests.  Some researchers feel that highly abstract reasoning and planning must  always be reducible to linguistic or symbolic representations in order to  maintain transparency, but there is debate about this. There is also debate  about whether LLM-based approaches can generalise to richly structured,  non‑textual reality such as images and three-dimensional worlds. Overall,  embodied learning will be important for credible AI advancement.

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Basic multimodal data is  embodied in simulation  environments

Researchers integrate  basic multimodal  data (vision, sound  and language) with  rudimentary world  models in embodied  simulation environments.  Early advances in robotic  reasoning and planning  with limited grounding  in reality.

AI agents acquire more  powerful world models

AI agents acquire deeper  hierarchical world  models, capable of richer  zero‑shot generalisation  and more advanced  planning in open-ended  tasks. Robotics platforms  provide lifelong learning  through continual  sensory experience.

Embodied AI achieves  human-like capabilities

Embodied AI achieves  human-like capabilities  in manipulation and  exploration, including  advanced self-awareness  and real-time learning.  Grounding in physical  reality and multimodal  perception becomes  standard, facilitating  robust causal reasoning.  Autonomous AI  systems operate across  diverse domains,  dynamically adapting  and self‑experimenting  to discover new skills  and strategies. World  models move towards  being as flexible and  abstract as those seen in  biological intelligence,  driving new forms of  interaction between  intelligent systems and  the environment.

39
<<<END_PAGE_43>>>

<<<PAGE_44>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

PULSE OF SCIENCE

QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

40

Artificial Intelligence

1.1.3 AI for science

One of the most exciting possibilities of AI lies in its potential to accelerate  scientific discovery. But how and where to apply AI to science requires  careful consideration.11

All science involves abstracting data into representations that make future  data predictable. AI research, especially in world modelling, can be helpful to  science if it focuses on learning these abstractions rather than reconstructing  every detail. AI, as a “digital microscope”, provides novel, data-driven approaches  to scientific problems, differing from classical rationalism and reductionism.  Scientific discovery is currently constrained by the pace and cost of data  generation, and AI can accelerate progress via automated experiment design  and high-throughput simulation.12 AI will also democratise tools for scientific  discovery, allowing for new digital experiments, hypothesis generation and  global‑scale simulations such as digital organisms and weather models.

AI may itself become a target of scientific study in terms of new mathematical  frameworks and methods such as “vector-based probability”. There are  open challenges still: one is achieving integration across abstraction levels —  from language to vision, for instance, and from virtual to physical domains.  Nevertheless, there is optimism that AI-driven approaches will create  new scientific paradigms and domains, though modesty is warranted, as  fundamental principles of intelligence and discovery remain undiscovered.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

AI accelerates scientific  discovery in data-rich fields

AI accelerates scientific  discovery in data-rich  fields such as astronomy  and genomics. Such  fields experience  accelerated discovery  thanks to AI-driven  automated analysis and  experiment design. More  nuanced integrative  models linking text,  images and simulations  are developed.

AI-driven science becomes  routine in some areas

High-throughput  research and complex  simulations routinely  make use of AI to  facilitate digital  experimentation and  hypothesis generation.  New methodologies  are underpinned by  novel mathematical  representation.

AI-curated scientific  disciplines emerge

As AI systems  autonomously  generate and test  theories, simulate  virtual organisms  and link abstract  reasoning to physical  experimentation,  AI becomes the  curator of numerous  scientific disciplines.  Interdisciplinary AI  collaboration cr eates  new paradigms and  research domains.  Scientific progress  reaches unprecedented  levels, with AI becomes  both a central research  tool and object of  scientific inquiry itself.  AI systems begin to  autonomously contribute  foundational principles  to scientific knowledge.
<<<END_PAGE_44>>>

<<<PAGE_45>>>
Artificial Intelligence

1.1.4 AI foundations

Deep learning has dramatically accelerated progress on a wide range of AI  problems. This has led to large swathes of the research community focusing  their efforts on refining and scaling existing approaches to tackle increasingly  complex tasks. But the underlying technology remains in its infancy and  continued progress may require fundamental conceptual breakthroughs.

LLMs and correlated AI models, for example, excel at fluency and generalisation,  but are prone to spurious correlations, lack causal and counterfactual reasoning,  and can be fooled by perceptual illusions. Robust intelligence will require new  representations and architectures, going beyond scaling and focusing on  joint perception-action models, internal consistency and intervention‑centric  learning.13,14,15 If research is to progress in helpful ways, there is a need to  rethink education,16 both in the content of statistics and algorithms, and in  interdisciplinary skills spanning philosophy, ethics and computational sciences.17  Ethical, safety and alignment considerations must also be embedded at  the foundational level, especially regarding long-term impacts on society,  democracy and human flourishing.

The future of AI is as much about discovering new principles as it is about  continuous improvement and scaling of current architectures. Researchers  in this field must remain humble and open to unexpected discoveries.  Furthermore, AI’s trajectory should be guided not only by intellectual elegance  but also by societal needs, human values and democracy.

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Advances in AI  architectures address  robustness and causal  reasoning

Increased focus on  intervention-centric  and perception-action  models yield more  robust AI that displays  causal reasoning. Early  integration of ethical and  safety constraints at the  architectural level creates  an ethos of responsible  development.

Foundational principles  undergo fundamental shifts

New representations and  abstraction layers replace  correlation-centric  models, altering the way  AI systems are developed  and the ways in which  they can be deployed.  AI systems demonstrate  deeper causal reasoning  and counterfactual  inference, with education  systems adapting to  teach new forms of  algorithmic literacy.

AI technology and societal  interfaces are reshaped

AI models embedded  with alignment to  human values and  democratic ideals  become standard.  Philosophy and  ethics become core  elements in AI research  and deployment.  The field moves  towards integrating  cognitive, ethical and  computational sciences.  AI is ever more tightly  integrated into learning,  governance and societal  advancement.

41
<<<END_PAGE_45>>>

<<<PAGE_46>>>
QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI PULSE OF SCIENCE

QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI PULSE OF SCIENCE

42

1.2

Quantum Computing

CHAIR:   Sabrina Maniscalco

Professor of Quantum Information and Logic,  University of Helsinki; Adjunct Professor, Aalto  University, Finland

CONTRIBUTORS:   Sebastian Blatt, John Goold, Cornelius Hempel,  Iordanis Kerenidis, Jungsang Kim, Pedro Lopes,  Kanav Setia, Sofia Vallecorsa

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

When information is stored in the physical states  of objects whose behaviour is governed by the  laws of quantum physics, new and powerful  forms of information-processing become possible.  Suitably realised and managed, this creates novel  computational capabilities that have the potential  to significantly impact sectors as diverse as  finance,1 materials science,2 cryptography3 and   drug discovery.4

The basic premise of quantum computing is that  quantum particles such as atoms, their subatomic  components, photons of light and certain carefully  managed larger objects can operate in “quantum  superposition” states that allow them to encode  information in an unprecedented manner. Today’s  familiar “classical” machines store and process  information encoded as the binary digits (bits) “0” or  “1”. Quantum bits (or qubits) can not only be states  0 and 1 but can also exist in “superposition states”,  where the bit can be both 0 and 1 until observed.  Leveraging quantum superposition and quantum  entanglement, qubits can perform computational  routines that are not possible on classical machines.

Qubits must be isolated from the large-scale  “classical” world, otherwise the subatomic quantum  properties that give them their unique powers are  overwhelmed by classical noise. The result is errors  in the computations that are extremely difficult to  contain. Nonetheless, progress in isolation, noise  mitigation and error correction appears to be  accelerating, and useful quantum computing that  outperforms what is reasonable and possible on a  classical computer could be achieved within the   next five years.5

In order to fulfil all of their potential as currently  understood, it is likely that quantum computers  will need to operate with hundreds of thousands  of “physical” qubits (for information processing,  these are grouped into structures known as “logical”  qubits). However, useful computations are possible  with far fewer qubits. This is partly because quantum  computers will not simply replace or supersede  classical machines, but will provide a novel set  of capabilities that can supplement classical  capabilities in a hybrid quantum-classical setup.

Applications are diverse, but one extremely  promising area is quantum simulation. Because  they follow the same rules as atoms and molecules,  quantum computers can operate as controllable  demonstrators of what is possible within physical  materials. This is why they will be so useful for tasks  such as innovation in battery technology6 and  drug design for medical intervention.7 Another  much‑publicised task is decryption. Quantum  computers pose a threat to many of today’s  cryptographic protocols, whose security relies  on mathematical routines that are inaccessible  only to classical computation.8 Because the  mathematical routines followed by quantum  computers are fundamentally different, this security  is compromised by the existence of suitably powerful  quantum processors that can run a computation  known as Shor’s algorithm. This is why a number of  governments around the world are now investing  heavily in “post-quantum” cryptography.9
<<<END_PAGE_46>>>

<<<PAGE_47>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS

After more than 40 years in development, quantum  computing is coming of age, and looks likely to  become a multi-billion-dollar industry over the  next couple of decades. Though progress has been  faster than expected, Hardware development  remains a challenge, and there is still no consensus  over which of the many hardware approaches will  eventually achieve scaleable fault-tolerant quantum  computation. Similarly, Algorithm design is still  in its early stages, and the number and range of  applications that are uniquely suited to quantum  computing remain small. Because noise-inducing  disturbances of any kind are a fundamental  obstacle to quantum computing, a significant  effort is being made in the field of Quantum error  correction and noise mitigation. Here too, there  is reason for optimism, as implementations are  growing in complexity. Implementations of Near- term quantum computing are achieving not only  proofs of principle but also rudimentary — and  promising — advances in areas such as battery  development and cancer treatment.

ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

1.2 	 Quantum Computing

SUB-TOPICS

1.2.1	 Hardware development

1.2.2	 Algorithm design

1.2.3	 Quantum error correction  and noise mitigation

1.2.4	 Near-term quantum computing

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

Impactful breakthroughs in Quantum Computing  are expected to happen with a high level of  confidence in five to 10 years. Hardware and  Algorithm design are the sub-topics with highest  transformative effects. These are the areas that also  require more internationally coordinated action  to realise future opportunities, driving the high  Anticipation Potential score of this field.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/quantum

43
<<<END_PAGE_47>>>

<<<PAGE_48>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

PULSE OF SCIENCE

QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

44

Quantum Computing

Hardware development  1.2.1

Because quantum computing is most useful at scale, it is important   that the qubits are available in large numbers, connected to each other  in low-noise (and thus low-error) configurations. A range of hardware  approaches exist: superconducting qubits; neutral atoms; trapped ions;  photonics implementations; spins-in-silicon; diamond nitrogen-vacancy  centres; and several more. There is also a range of architectures: some are  based on digital logic gates, others are analogue implementations.   All of them have advantages and disadvantages, depending on the  envisaged application. As yet, there is no consensus on which approach,   or approaches, will ultimately achieve useful quantum computing that goes  beyond what is classically possible. The era of useful quantum computing  will probably see a wide-ranging set of options used, with each one suited  to different kinds of tasks, running algorithms designed to take advantage   of the hardware’s specific features and capabilities.

There is currently no metric by which the various hardware approaches   can be compared, but many of them are now sufficiently advanced to allow  on-site or remote access (via the cloud) to interested parties. This has created  a positive feedback regime, where users are contributing to design and  performance improvements. However, the machines and design principles  that currently exist are likely to be only a bridge to better future approaches,  so there are good scientific and economic reasons for holding off on scaling  up many of the current systems. However, there are plans to deliver a fault- tolerant superconducting quantum computer capable of executing  100 million quantum gates on 200 logical qubits by 2029.10 This would  be a tangible benchmark for scalable quantum advantage.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Access to quantum  processors improves

Useful algorithms  run on hundreds of  fault-tolerant logical  qubits. More hardware  originators offer access  to end users, creating  co-design opportunities  and further accelerating  innovation. Europe’s  integration of quantum  computing into  high‑performance  classical-computing  centres leads to new  application ideas.  The drive to improve  quantum‑computing  hardware creates  secondary benefits by  further stimulating  innovation and demand  in classical control  electronics, laser systems  and other technologies.

Quantum advantage  is widely accepted

Qubit counts on  superconducting  processors reach many  hundreds of thousands,  allowing the useful  implementation of  quantum algorithms  able to solve complex  problems and generate  business value. The  performance of  quantum-computing  hardware drives the  development of better  high-performance  classical computing.

The million-logical-qubit  era arrives

Processors that  incorporate millions  of logical qubits are  routinely available,  accessible via cloud  services. Hardware  development focusses  in on a relatively small  number of the most  successful technologies,  with “losers” dropping  out of the running.
<<<END_PAGE_48>>>

<<<PAGE_49>>>
Quantum Computing

Algorithm design 1.2.2

Software for quantum computing is evolving along with the hardware.   At present, there are relatively few algorithms that will make the quantum  computing era truly revolutionary. But as hardware becomes more  accessible, co-design between hardware and algorithm designers   is likely to change that.

Already of interest is the use of quantum computers to perform quantum  simulation. One example is calculating the quantum states of molecules  involved in chemical energy storage, which will improve battery technology.  Similarly, the details of various chemical reactions involved in the efficacy   of pharmaceutical drugs are beyond the capabilities of classical computing,   but may be achievable on quantum computers with relatively few (perhaps  around 100) physical qubits. Research is already approaching relevance, with  large-scale chemistry simulations running on 70+ qubits, and useful hybrid  quantum-classical approaches such as Algorithmiq’s “Majorana Propagation”,  which aims to ensure that future quantum computations will be relevant,  accurate and scalable.11

Other healthcare and life-science applications are also envisaged.12 Many  quantum algorithms for quantum simulations use both quantum computers  and classical ones in an integrated manner. This is because only part of a  very complex molecular simulation benefits from quantum algorithms; the  rest of it can be performed by conventional simulation methods, including  machine‑learning techniques. This framework is known as hybrid quantum  computing and it is considered nowadays the only path to scalability.

There is also increasing interest in using quantum computers to assist  machine‑learning algorithms13 and financial modelling.14 Similarly, logistics  applications, such as routing and scheduling, may benefit from the advantages  offered by quantum search algorithms. As well as mathematically rigorous  algorithm design, there is scope for heuristics, where quantum-computing  advantages can be achieved through trial-and-error approaches.

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Niche algorithms provide  proof of principle

The small scale of  available quantum  computers is reflected  in the limited ambitions  of algorithm designers.  However, a drive  for implementable  algorithms, combined  with increasingly  powerful error-mitigation  methods, creates a  wave of niche useful  applications whose  success encourages  further search for  areas where quantum  computing provides   a useful resource.

Quantum chemistry  comes of age

Implementations of  chemistry algorithms on  large-scale processors  are changing materials  science and enabling  previously incalculable  tasks. Breakthroughs  in high-energy physics,  stimulated by quantum  algorithms that simulate  subatomic particles, are  achieved.

Medical quantum  computing algorithms  proliferate

Medical, pharmaceutical  and machine-learning  applications proliferate,  with algorithm design  benefitting from the  ever‑growing capabilities  of processors. Significant  numbers of financial  institutions boast  quantum-computing  divisions that seek to  leverage quantum  advantage in their sector.

45
<<<END_PAGE_49>>>

<<<PAGE_50>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

PULSE OF SCIENCE

QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

46

Quantum Computing

1.2.3 Quantum error correction  and noise mitigation

The single most difficult challenge facing quantum computing is the  problem of noise. External input of any kind, whether it comes from heat,  mechanical vibration, electrical or magnetic interference from surrounding  circuits, or any other source, has the potential to cause “decoherence”,   which alters the quantum state held in the qubits, instigating errors   or even unrecoverable halts in the computation.

Researchers have long planned to integrate quantum error correction (QEC)  resources into their quantum processors.15 Theoretical research indicates that  holding the data in a network of qubits designed to detect and correct errors  as they arise can significantly reduce the chances of a computation going awry.  Examples include the surface code16 and the low-density parity code (LDPC).17  Though this increases the required number of qubits, research in this area  has uncovered ways in which this overhead can be reduced.18 Demonstrations  of error correction on trapped-ion19 and neutral atom-based platforms20 are  particularly promising, suggesting a faster-than-expected trajectory toward  fault-tolerant quantum computing (FTQC).

To avoid the overhead of error correction, some other techniques have   been effective for noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) devices. These  include the implementations of error suppression, which decreases the errors  created in hardware operations, and error-mitigation routines that inspect  circuit operation and inject “inverted” noise to clean up qubit states while a  computation is ongoing.21,22 Other recent error-mitigation methods deal with  noise fully in post-processing, that is, after the read-out of quantum computers,  and have been proven to be optimal.23,24 Noise-reduction techniques applied to  the classical electronics used to control the circuit have also proved to be useful.  These can reconfigure the electronics’ settings and the signals applied so that  the information held in qubits is better protected.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

QEC becomes significantly  more efficient

The number of  qubits required for  implementing effective  error-correction routines  continues to shrink.  Qubits themselves are  developed to be less  noisy. Noise-control  techniques reduce  the estimates of when  a useful large-scale  quantum computer  will become available.  Hardware and algorithm  designers work alongside  error-correction  specialists to improve   co-design outcomes.

Error correction   is routine

The number of provably  effective quantum  error-correction  routines grows, and  research makes their  implementation ever  more efficient. Error- mitigation techniques  are integrated with error  correction in commercial  quantum computing.

Qubit availability   makes QEC easy

Qubits are available at  scale and at low cost,  enabling full-scale  quantum computers  to use quantum  error‑correction routines  as standard. Hybrid  classical-quantum  computing is the  standard approach, and  noise mitigation and  reduction techniques  developed for classical  circuits remain an  important component   of the hybrid processor.
<<<END_PAGE_50>>>

<<<PAGE_51>>>
Quantum Computing

1.2.4 Near-term quantum  computing

For a number of years now, quantum-computing researchers have spoken   of computing with noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) processors.25  These processors are not able to perform applications such as those using  Shor’s algorithm, which requires large-scale, fault-tolerant, error-corrected  quantum computers. However, there may be near-term applications   where small, noise-affected machines can still perform useful tasks, especially  given the growing number of noise-mitigation solutions. IBM has now  officially committed to achieving quantum advantage for a useful scientific  problem, using a hybrid quantum-classical approach, by 2026. Google and  Quantinuum have already demonstrated quantum circuits that are extremely  difficult, if not impossible, to simulate classically.26,27 However, these are still  largely without immediate physical or scientific relevance.

One area of imminent application is in light-activated cancer drugs.28  Quantum computation allows researchers to design drugs with molecular  energy states that allow them to be activated with particular wavelengths  of light that make the process of generating cancer-killing reactive oxygen  species less harmful to the patient than can be achieved using classical  means. Under the Quantum for Bio (Q4Bio) Wellcome Leap programme,29  six international teams have committed to delivering a demonstration of  quantum advantage for healthcare and life-sciences applications by March  2026. This is one of the most promising efforts to bring quantum out of  abstraction and into high-impact biomedical settings.

Near-term quantum computers could also speed up read-out from quantum  sensors and machine-learning-based tasks,30 and simulate realistic models  of materials, thanks to recent understanding of measures that can reduce  the resources required by several orders of magnitude.31 XPRIZE Quantum  Applications, a competition designed to generate algorithms that can help   solve current real-world challenges, may also stimulate progress.32 (GESDA  is the presenting sponsor of this initiative.)

5-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON

Niche applications make  small-scale quantum  computing useful

Bespoke algorithms  running on small, noisy  quantum processors  radically improve  resolution of sensing  and are also used for  materials and chemistry  applications. NISQ  processors running in  academic labs provide  useful insights into noise  and other fundamental  issues in quantum  computing. International  trade and collaboration  restrictions, imposed due  to unfounded fears about  decryption capabilities,  stifle progress in this era.

New application ideas   flood the market

Algorithms designed  for NISQ processors are  adapted to improve  the performance of  larger-scale quantum  computers. Interest  stimulated by initiatives  such as the XPRIZE  Quantum Applications  creates a flood of new  application ideas, many  of which have positive  impacts in niche areas. .

NISQ machines become  learning tools

NISQ processors are  largely superseded for  computing purposes  but remain useful for  workforce training and  algorithm development.

47
<<<END_PAGE_51>>>

<<<PAGE_52>>>
QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI PULSE OF SCIENCE

QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI PULSE OF SCIENCE

48

1.3

Unconventional  Computing

The prospect of encoding computations in light  rather than electricity is also showing significant  promise. The approach could offer substantial   speed-ups on a variety of problems, including AI,   and commercialisation is already well under way. CO-CHAIRS:

Charles Roques-Carmes Visiting Scientist, Research Laboratory  of Electronics at the Massachusetts Institute  of Technology

Johannes Schemmel Head of the ASIC Laboratory and the Electronic  Visions Group at the University of Heidelberg,  Germany

Lena Smirnova Assistant Professor, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg  School of Public Health in Baltimore, Maryland;  Past President of the International MPS Society

Ángel Goñi-Moreno Head of Biocomputation Lab, Technical University  of Madrid, Spain

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

The silicon transistor is one of the most far‑reaching  inventions in human history. However, the  exponential improvements in computing  performance predicted by Moore’s law have begun  to falter as the technology hits fundamental  physical limits. This has sparked renewed interest  in alternative computing technologies that could  provide workarounds to these constraints.

In part, the interest in unconventional computing  has been driven by a growing appreciation that  information-processing is a fundamental part of  many natural processes and that clever engineering  can help harness these processes for our own use.  Efforts to exploit the unique behaviour of quantum  systems — covered elsewhere in the Radar — have  achieved the most attention and investment.  But a host of other unconventional approaches  to computing show promise.

The unique capabilities of the human brain have  drawn considerable attention, for example. Today’s  AI software is already loosely inspired by the way  neurons work, but neuromorphic engineers are  attempting to go a step further and create hardware  that more faithfully replicates the brain’s form and  function. Others are investigating whether small  conglomerations of brain cells known as organoids  can be coaxed into solving computational tasks.

Even simpler biological processes may hold  enormous computing potential. DNA’s ability to  encode, transform and replicate information holds  clear parallels to the binary code at the heart of  classical computers, and raises the possibility of  controlling more complex cellular and intercellular  processes that could enable us to go beyond  conventional circuit-based computing paradigms.
<<<END_PAGE_52>>>

<<<PAGE_53>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS

Although the standard pathways of computing  technology have created a revolution in the human  experience, there are other ways of processing  information that might offer radically different  possibilities. One is Neuromorphic computing,  where technology aims to mimic the architectures  and processes, where they are understood, of the  biological brain. Given evolution’s role in developing  biological brains, this has the potential to be fast and  energy-efficient. Also in progress is an exploration  of Organoid intelligence, where biological brain  tissue is grown at very small scale and its signal  and information-processing capabilities explored  by in vitro experiments. In Cellular computing,  the biological machinery inside networks of cells  could one day be harnessed to solve challenges  in areas as varied as environmental remediation  and drug discovery. This involves computing with  whole molecules as the input and output, and has  the potential to perform a variety of tasks that are  beyond the capabilities of conventional computing.  On a different tack, researchers are experimenting  with replacing the electrons of traditional computing  with the photons of Optical computing. This has  several potential advantages, including high data  throughput and improved energy efficiency.

ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

1.3 	 Unconventional Computing

SUB-TOPICS

1.3.1	 Neuromorphic computing

1.3.2	 Organoid intelligence

1.3.3	 Cellular computing

1.3.4	 Optical computing

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

Optical and Neuromorphic computing show the  most defined road map, with lower uncertainty  and transformative breakthroughs expected in the  coming five to seven years. The fields of Cellular  computing and Organoid intelligence appear more  speculative and less transformational. However,  low awareness of progress on those topics outside  the scientific community raises the Anticipation  Potential scores. Looking further ahead, Organoid  intelligence stands out as the most uncertain and  long‑term prospect — highly promising in vision  but still only on the edge of feasibility.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/un-comp

49
<<<END_PAGE_53>>>

<<<PAGE_54>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

PULSE OF SCIENCE

QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

50

Unconventional Computing

Neuromorphic computing 1.3.1

Neuromorphic computing seeks to replicate aspects of the structure and  function of biological neural networks in electronics. The aim is to develop  machines that will ultimately display the same capabilities as the human  brain, including its incredible energy efficiency.1

This requires the development of new kinds of computer chips that more  faithfully mimic the way neurons work and are arranged.2,3 In particular,  neuromorphic systems replicate how brain cells communicate via spikes   of electrical activity, which is very different from how conventional processors  operate and is the basis of the approach’s energy efficiency.

Large-scale neuromorphic systems are starting to come online. Intel’s Hala  Point system combines 1152 of its Loihi 2 neuromorphic processors to emulate  up to 1.15 billion neurons.4 And SpiNNcloud Systems is selling neuromorphic  supercomputers based on chip designs pioneered by the SpiNNAker project at  the University of Manchester, UK.5,6,7 Also, analogue neuromorphic computers,  like the BrainScaleS system, that operate in continuous time, just as the brain  does, are becoming available to the larger scientific community.8

There have also been breakthroughs in chips that carry out computation  directly in memory.9 These are well-suited to implementing neuromorphic  computing but also hold promise for reducing deep-learning AI’s energy  consumption. That could lead to growing convergence between the   two fields.10

However, the field is held back by a lack of shared software frameworks, which  means that research remains fragmented and building neuromorphic models  is far more complicated than it is with conventional AI.11 A lack of efficient  training algorithms also means performance still significantly lags behind deep  learning, though there has been recent progress on that front.12,13 Insights from  neuroscience could help close the gap,14,15 but faithfully replicating the brain’s  function and structure in silicon remains a distant goal.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Useful neuronal  architectures emerge

New hardware based on  memory technologies  better suited to  implementing spiking  neural networks reaches  commercial scale thanks  largely to demand for  more energy‑efficient  chips for deep learning.  Algorithms for  navigation, trajectory  generation and motor  control create building  blocks that can be  deployed in small robots,  but only in research  settings as they still  underperform deep  learning.

Neuromorphic computing is  developed for embodied AI

Better models of  neurons and a deeper  understanding of plasticity  mean neuromorphic  architectures can do more.  Deep‑learning AI models  are adapted to work on  neuromorphic hardware  to exploit energy savings.  Neuro‑emulators carry out  brain-scale simulations of  bio‑inspired architectures,  advancing understanding  of brain dynamics.  Neuromorphic engineers  understand how to  combine algorithmic  building blocks to  perform complex tasks.  The approach dominates  embodied AI that works  with sensory signals  and motion control.  Low‑power neuromorphic  edge devices are used to  pre‑process all kinds of  sensor data.

Experiments demonstrate  brain-like memory and logic

We understand better  the processes and causal  relationships between  different levels of the  brain, from molecular  to cellular to circuit  to structures. Various  experimental realisations  of neuromorphic  computing demonstrate  memory and logic that,  while still primitive  compared to the  naturally evolved brain,  work in recognisably  mammalian ways.  Robots powered  by neuromorphic  computing are widely  deployed in the defence  and care sectors. AI  is pervasive and an  integral part of our  environment, with the  technological basis of AI  shifted to neuromorphic  technologies.
<<<END_PAGE_54>>>

<<<PAGE_55>>>
Unconventional Computing

Organoid intelligence 1.3.2

Rather than trying to create software and hardware that mimics the   way the brain works, an emerging field of research seeks to coax nature’s  most powerful computing technology — biological neural networks —   into carrying out computations.

This possibility has only just become tractable thanks to recent advances  in organoids: simplified and miniaturised versions of organs created using  stem‑cell technology. Small conglomerations of human neurons have replicated  some of the form and function of our brains.16 Now researchers are investigating  whether these organoids could be used to create new hybrid computing  technologies that combine biological and electronic components.17

Early experiments have shown that neural cultures can be taught to play  video games, show features of reservoir computing or implement computer  logic.18,19,20,21 If the technology can be scaled up it could have applications in AI,  robotics and brain-machine interfaces.

Significant advances will be needed first, however, including engineering larger,  more complex organoids, interfacing with them reliably and understanding  how they learn and compute.22 There has been recent progress in more  sophisticated “assembloids” that model several brain regions23,24 as well as  boosting the diversity of cell types.25,26 New 3D electrode arrays are also providing  more sophisticated interfaces27,28 and the extensive hardware required to sustain  living cells is getting miniaturised.29

Dreams of living computers remain distant, however, and in the near term the  technology will be a tool for brain research and biomedical testing. There are  also ethical concerns around when, and whether, more sophisticated organoids  could be thought of as conscious entities in their own right.30,31

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Organoids become more  complex and addressable

Our ability to build  complex brain organoids  with multiple cell  types and extensive  vascularisation improves  significantly, as does  our ability to combine  them to create more  advanced assembloids.  The development of  reliable, high-density  3D microelectrode  arrays makes it possible  to accurately record  organoids’ neural  activity on their surface  and in their core and  transmit data to them  for processing. This  provides rudimentary  models of plasticity  and cognition with  immediate applications  in drug development  and neurotoxicity testing.

Fundamental science  breakthroughs give  organoids useful function

Vast amounts of  data collected from  experiments with brain  organoids helps tease  out the specifics of  the algorithms that  underpin learning and  memory in humans.  This provides important  insights for research into  neurological diseases  and exciting new  avenues for AI. Brain  organoids connected  to retinal, olfactory  and other sensory  organoids show promise  as energy‑efficient  environmental  sensors. The difficulty  of packaging and  sustaining organoids  remains a barrier to  practical applications.

Organoids are integrated  with conventional  electronics

Improvements in  technology that sustains  and interfaces with  organoids mean that  they can be easily and  ethically integrated with  conventional electronics.  They are routinely used  for sensing in robotics,  and interconnected  networks of organoids  can carry out highly  complex computations.  Brain organoids can be  built at scales impossible  in nature, allowing  them to tackle novel  computational problems.  The rapidly improving  abilities of organoids  provoke ethical work  practices and discussion  about suppressing  any development of  consciousness and  sentience.

51
<<<END_PAGE_55>>>

<<<PAGE_56>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

PULSE OF SCIENCE

QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

52

Unconventional Computing

Cellular computing 1.3.3

Many biological processes take a molecular input, carry out some process  using molecular or cellular “machinery” and output a different set of  molecules. This observation has seeded a field in which researchers attempt  to modify these processes to perform useful computing-like routines. So far,  most work uses synthetic biology to build “genetic circuits” equivalent to  logic circuits in conventional computers.32

Cellular computing can go beyond mimicking standard computing, though.33  A cell’s components can be reconfigured in response to external stimuli, and  evolution allows populations of cells to adapt to changing environmental  circumstances. They also function well in the presence of noise. There  are multiple signal pathways within each cell, enabling massively parallel  information processing.

This opens up the prospect of performing “whole-cell biocomputations”  to solve challenges as varied as environmental remediation, drug discovery  and medical diagnosis.34 There is increasing focus on harnessing networks  of cells to carry out more sophisticated distributed computation35,36,37 and  even incorporating viruses as an additional communication channel.38 Newly  engineered plant-microbe communication channels open up the prospect  of programming entire ecosystems.39

Neuromorphic computing is proving a useful framework for guiding adaptive  cellular processes,40,41 though probabilistic computing could be another  powerful conceptual lens.42 The field needs deeper engagement with  theoretical computer science to give it a firmer conceptual footing, in particular  to formalise how various synthetic-biology tools process information.43

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Parts and processes  are standardised

Lab automation  allows experiments at  greater scale. AI helps  to crunch through the  resulting data to provide  new insights. Firmer  characterisation of the  computational abilities  of biological parts and  processes opens the door  to commercialisation.  This leads to a flowering  of computer-aided  design tools to help  build cellular computers.  Mechanisms of bacterial  evolution provide  inspiration for the design  of new biocomputing  pathways. Venture  capital supports an  increasing number of  companies exploring the  commercial potential  of the field using  proprietary biological  hardware.

Biocomputing goes   beyond Boolean logic

Research catalogues  an array of natural  biocomputing pathways  and creates a new,  post‑Boolean set of logic  operations and design  tools for information  processing. Hybrid  models that combine  cellular computing with  other technologies show  promise. Researchers  establish ways to harness  a cell’s metabolism to  perform computations,  with applications in  biomedicine.

Cellular computing enables  ecosystem engineering

The full computational  power of the cells is  formalised. This makes  it feasible to use cellular  computers in the wild for  pollution remediation,  atmospheric sensing  and even re-engineering  ecosystems to make  them more resilient or  productive. Biological  computation combines  with quantum biology  research to create  interesting and  potentially fruitful  new approaches to  information processing.
<<<END_PAGE_56>>>

<<<PAGE_57>>>
Unconventional Computing

Optical computing 1.3.4

Almost all of the modern world’s information-processing tasks are powered  by electrons. But scientists have long considered whether the photon — the  quantum particle of light — could be a more promising candidate. Optical  systems are not subject to electrical resistance and they can transmit data  across multiple frequencies in parallel, massively boosting energy efficiency  and data flows.44

These advantages have been known about for decades, but recent innovations,  driven by investments from the telecoms industry, have started to make  optical‑computing devices practical. Breakthroughs in silicon photonics are  making it possible to build sophisticated optical processors using the same  technology as the existing chip industry.45

The most promising near-term application is in AI. Optical processors are  very efficient at carrying out operations known as matrix multiplications,  which are fundamental to deep-learning algorithms.46 Two startups targeting  AI applications recently unveiled advanced processors that integrate both  photonic and electronic components, suggesting the technology is on the   cusp of commercial breakout.47,48

Optical approaches to quantum computing are also maturing fast, with  breakthroughs in the mass manufacture of chips and the networking of large- scale devices.49,50 Photonic technology could also be used to build neuromorphic  processors and analogue computing devices,51,52,53,54 and the inherent noisiness  of optical systems can be harnessed for tasks like probabilistic machine learning  and optimisation.55,56

Catching up with decades of progress in silicon transistor technology remains  an enormous engineering and financial challenge, though. In addition, photonic  chips rely on wavelengths of light measured in micrometres, making it unlikely  they could achieve the kind of miniaturisation found in silicon chips already  boasting nanoscale features.

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Photonic hardware  becomes mainstream   AI technology

Photonic-processor  developers further  enhance the energy  efficiency of their  devices and expand  the repertoire of AI  models they can run.  They become a popular  approach for running  all kinds of AI models  as the sector’s energy  bills continue to balloon.  Noisy optical chips  also become the go‑to  for implementing  probabilistic neural  networks. Photonics  becomes a popular  approach for processing  inherently optical signals  such as lidar and camera  data.

Quantum computing  embraces photonic  hardware

Photonic approaches to  quantum computing  gain traction, thanks  to the simplicity of the  hardware compared  with superconducting  approaches and  their compatibility  with light‑based  quantum and classical  communication  technology. They  also enable new  analogue‑computing  paradigms that  significantly boost  scientists’ ability to  model some complex  phenomena.

Fabrication progress creates  high-performance photonic  computing

The success of  optical devices in  certain specialised  applications drives  progress in fabrication  and integration  technology, helping  photonics to close the  gap with silicon-based  chips. It becomes  a general‑purpose  computing technology  and, thanks to faster  processing speeds and  much lower energy  requirement, replaces  conventional computing  hardware in several  important tasks and  applications.

53
<<<END_PAGE_57>>>

<<<PAGE_58>>>
QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI PULSE OF SCIENCE

PULSE OF SCIENCE

QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

54

1.4

Robotics and Embodied  Intelligence

CHAIR:   Minoru Asada

Professor of Adaptive Machine Systems at the  Graduate School of Engineering, University of  Osaka, Japan

CONTRIBUTORS:   Rachid Alami, Aude Billard, Gordon Cheng,  Peter Corke, Hiroshi Ishiguro, Danica Kragic,  Christophe Leroux, Sergey Levine, Shogo  Tanaka, Astrid Rosenthal-von der Pütten

GESDA wishes to thank euROBIN (www.eurobin-project.eu),  the European excellence network on AI-powered robotics, for  its generosity in sharing insights gathered from the research  community on anticipating the future of robotics research,  which significantly contributed to this brief.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Technologists have long dreamed of automating  dull, dirty and dangerous jobs, freeing up humans  for higher-value work. Advances in AI are at last  opening up the prospect of smart, dextrous robots  working alongside humans.1

Robots have played a crucial role in industry for  decades, with close to 4 million in operation today.2  However, getting them off factory floors and into  the real world has proved challenging. Despite our  ability to build machines that easily surpass humans  in terms of power and precision, imbuing them  with the intelligence and perceptual capabilities to  carry out even the simplest human jobs has proven  tougher than expected.

Much of that is to do with the challenges of the  physical environment. Traditionally, programming  robots has involved creating detailed mathematical  models of the robot and its environment, which  are then used to deterministically control its  actions. The approach is effective for well-defined  tasks in predictable environments, such as  assembling vehicles in an automotive factory.  But this hand‑engineered approach struggles  with open‑ended problems and the complexity  encountered in environments that were not  designed with robots in mind.

AI, and in particular machine learning, promises a  solution to this challenge. These techniques learn  how to behave by training on data, which means they  are not constrained by the designer’s preconceptions.  This makes them more flexible and adaptable. There  has already been significant success in using these  approaches to improve robots’ visual perception and  navigational capabilities. But recent advances are  now making it possible to apply AI to more complex  functions like sensorimotor control, planning and  human interaction. In particular, breakthroughs in  multimodal AI that can process a variety of different  kinds of data are fuelling rapid improvements in  robotic capabilities.3

This gives the potential for a new generation  of mobile robots to have the physical and even  social intelligence to work seamlessly alongside  us. Some of the most promising use-cases are in  areas such as logistics, manufacturing, agriculture,  food preparation and care work. Thanks to investor  exuberance following recent AI advances, funding  for these possible futures has been growing  significantly.4 Embedding AI in physical bodies could  also help models learn richer representations of the  world, boosting their capabilities across domains.

That said, robots still struggle with tasks that humans  find effortless, such as folding clothes or navigating  crowded spaces. Solving these challenges with AI  will require vast amounts of real-world robotics data  that is both difficult and costly to obtain, though  advances in robot training simulators could help  plug this gap. In the face of shrinking workforces and  ageing populations around the world, proponents  say the investment will be worth it. However, it is also  important to anticipate the potential disruption to  employment that could ensue if a significant  number of robots start entering the workforce.5  The pace of change will require more agile  approaches to governance that engages a wider  range of stakeholders to adaptively respond to  emerging ethical and social concerns.6
<<<END_PAGE_58>>>

<<<PAGE_59>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS

The science-fiction dream of robots working  seamlessly alongside us may be inching closer. Rapid  advances in AI are transforming Robotic software,  replacing hand-engineered, modular systems  with massive models that can simultaneously  solve perception, control and planning. Caution is  warranted, though, as these models are data- and  power-hungry and their decision-making is hard  to decipher. Breakthroughs in Robotic hardware  will be needed to take full advantage of these new  capabilities. Better tactile sensing could allow robots  to take on dextrous tasks currently out of reach for  them. But advances in both battery technology  and energy-efficient chips will be necessary to  boost mobile robot run times. A still bigger barrier  is AI’s insatiable thirst for Data, which is much  harder to collect when it comes to robotics. Open  data repositories are helping broaden access, and  training models in simulations could provide a  potential workaround to the shortage. Ensuring  seamless Human-robot interaction will be more of a  challenge. Large language models have opened up  a promising new way to interface with robots. But  imbuing them with social intelligence and the ability  to predict human behaviours remains a distant goal.

ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

1.4 	 Robotics and Embodied  Intelligence

SUB-TOPICS

1.4.1	 Robotic software

1.4.2	 Robotic hardware

1.4.3	 Data

1.4.4	 Human-robot interaction

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

All sub-topics of Robotics and Embodied Intelligence  have a high Anticipation Potential score. The main  challenge in the field remains the expected major  breakthroughs in Robotic hardware technology,  which are believed to require another 15 years of  research and development before they are realised.  Human-robot interaction is a topic that will mature  twice as fast and be highly transformative for society.  Robotic software is the area that is believed to require  the most international coordinated action.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/robo

55
<<<END_PAGE_59>>>

<<<PAGE_60>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

PULSE OF SCIENCE

QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

56

Robotics and Embodied Intelligence

Robotic software 1.4.1

Robotic control software is typically modular, featuring subsystems that  solve specific problems, including perception, navigation or motor control.7  Historically, these modules have been hand-coded, incorporating models  of the robot’s hardware and physical environment, and decision trees telling  it what to do in different situations.

This can achieve impressive results. Boston Dynamics’s agile humanoid robots  use this approach,8 for instance — but typically only for highly constrained  tasks. Advances in AI mean these modules are increasingly being replaced by  more flexible, learned models. Deep learning already powers “simultaneous  localisation and mapping” (SLAM) in autonomous vehicles and drones,9 and  helps sorting robots pick out and manipulate objects.10 Progress is being made  in applying AI to locomotion and planning too.11

Transformers — the algorithms behind large language models — promise to  greatly expand AI’s use in robotics.12 LLMs themselves provide a more natural  way to interface with robots via language.13 But transformers also power new  multimodal models that can work with multiple data types.14,15 This is driving a  shift from modular architectures to “end-to-end” models that solve perception,  control and planning simultaneously.16,17 The latest vision‑language-action  models (VLAs) can tackle a wide variety of tasks on a range of robotic hardware  platforms.18,19 Interest is also growing in the use of diffusion models, which  power AI image generators, for robot-motion planning.20

The ability to draw correlations between different data sources, including  language, vision and motion, could allow robots “embodied intelligence”, a  deeper understanding of the physical world and their place in it.21,22,23 This could  overcome AI’s “symbol grounding problem”,24 the ability to link the learned  word or “symbol” of an object, such as “cup”, to the object’s real-world context.  It could also allow AI to develop a sense of “self”,25,26 although a comprehensive  theoretical understanding of consciousness remains a challenge.

Moreover, current models are data- and power-hungry and cannot learn  on the fly. Their huge size means they must be stored on the cloud and  communication delays can be too long for fine-grained motor control. Their  decision-making is also inscrutable, raising safety concerns. Breakthroughs  in lifelong learning and interpretability will be crucial in the long run.27,28

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Robot locomotion is solved

Rapid advances in  VLAs see end-to-end  approaches to robotic  control replace modular  architectures for the vast  majority of applications.  Mobile robots designed  to operate in real-world  environments become  almost entirely AI- powered. Locomotion  in diverse environments  becomes a solved  problem, greatly  expanding application  areas. LLMs make it  possible for non-experts  to direct robots through  simple natural-language  commands.

Robots begin to exhibit  embodied intelligence

The most advanced  robots start to exhibit  sophisticated embodied  intelligence, allowing  them to undertake  increasingly complex  tasks and rapidly adapt  to new challenges.  Breakthroughs in  interpretable AI as well as  social acceptance of the  technology allay some  of the safety concerns  around widespread  robotic deployment.

Self-conscious robots  become lifelong learners

As the deployment  of robotic systems  accelerates, autonomous  embodied AI systems are  capable of complex social  interactions, empathy  and moral reasoning.  Breakthroughs in  lifelong learning make  it possible for robots to  learn directly from their  own experience rather  than rely on generic  pre‑trained models.
<<<END_PAGE_60>>>

<<<PAGE_61>>>
Robotics and Embodied Intelligence

Robotic hardware 1.4.2

Software has long been the biggest bottleneck to robotics advances,   but for the technology to reach its full potential, breakthroughs in hardware  are also crucial.

Novel manipulator designs are allowing robots to carry out more delicate tasks  than were previously possible.29 But they are still a long way from replicating  the dexterity of the human hand. In particular, tactile sensing is still unable to  provide the precise feedback crucial for handling soft and delicate objects or  operating safely and socially alongside humans.30,31

However, advances are being made, and the latest robotics research  platforms now include high-density tactile skins, improved fingertip sensors  and biologically inspired cameras.32 The field of soft robotics could also  provide solutions in the form of active materials that can sense and actuate  simultaneously.33 In particular, electronic skins that can provide multimodal  sensory feedback are advancing rapidly.34,35 Artificial-muscle technology is a  promising option,36,37,38 and the ability to rapidly transition between soft and  rigid states could make it safer to deploy around humans than conventional  hardware.

There are more prosaic concerns, though. Both the computer hardware  required to run AI and the mechatronics that enable robots to move are  power‑hungry, severely limiting run times for mobile robots. Better battery  technology and more efficient chips will be crucial before robots can be more  widely deployed. Robotic hardware is also expensive, though prices are falling.39  Cheap open-source robotics platforms, in particular, promise to democratise  access to advanced hardware.40

More broadly, there is often a lack of imagination when it comes robotic body  plans. Most research is focussed on robotic arms, quadrupeds or humanoid  robots, but the technology doesn’t need to be constrained to form factors  already found in nature. Evolutionary robotics, which adapts robot designs to  specific challenges,41 and robots that can dynamically alter their configuration  hold considerable promise.42

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Robots become master  manipulators

More advanced  manipulators and  advances in tactile  sensing allow robots to  take on tasks requiring  greater dexterity and so  become commonplace  in industries like retail,  logistics, recycling  and manufacturing.  Economies of scale  see the cost of  robotic hardware fall  significantly, further  spurring adoption.

Humanoid robots take over

Breakthroughs in  battery technology  significantly increase  run times of mobile  robots. Humanoid robots  become the dominant  form factor due to the  ease of integrating  them into environments  already adapted for  humans. While still  largely mechanical,  robots feature an  increasing number of soft  components, particularly  those deployed in  safety‑conscious areas  such as medicine and  care work.

Robot bodies evolve

Advances in hardware  capabilities make it  possible to realise the  exotic designs dreamed  up by evolutionary  robotics algorithms,  leading to a rapid  diversification in robot  body shapes. Robots look  increasingly “organic” as  they are now primarily  composed of soft, active  materials and powered  by artificial muscles.

57
<<<END_PAGE_61>>>

<<<PAGE_62>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

PULSE OF SCIENCE

QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

58

Robotics and Embodied Intelligence

Data 1.4.3

Today’s state-of-the-art AI is incredibly data-hungry, which presents  significant challenges for robotics applications. Most recent advances have  come in domains like computer vision and natural-language processing,  which can take advantage of the reams of image and text data on the  internet. But real-world robotics data is much harder to come by, constraining  the ability to train sophisticated models.

Transformer-based AI presents both opportunities and fresh problems. Transfer  learning — the ability to take a model trained on one kind of robot and deploy  it on another — has been a long-standing challenge, as even small changes in  environment or robot configuration can throw models off.43 Transformers can  train on data from multiple robots to create more general policies that work  across varied embodiments and environments.44 However, training one of  these models requires colossal amounts of data.

One potential workaround involves training models in simulations before  porting them over to real-world robots.45 However, many of the tasks planned  for robots, such as handling soft and delicate objects, remain hard to  simulate.46 Designing virtual worlds is complicated and expensive, requiring  sustained effort from multidisciplinary teams.47 But high-fidelity simulators  are becoming increasingly accessible,48,49 and there have been significant  advances in techniques for transferring skills learned in virtual environments  to real-world robots.50 Emerging “world models” that can generate physically  realistic 3D environments from scratch could also become a powerful tool for  training robots.51

Pooling data-collection efforts will be crucial going forward, and there are  promising efforts to create massive, open, robotics datasets.52,53 There will  also be a growing focus on more data-efficient training approaches.54,55  Data shortages are likely to ease as more robots are deployed, though this  will benefit the private companies that build them more than academic  researchers.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Data remains a bottleneck

Data remains a major  bottleneck on robotic  advances, but rapidly  improving simulators,  the increasing availability  of open robotics data  and more data-efficient  training approaches  help maintain progress.  Ambitious governments  start to set up national  robotics centres with  large numbers of robots  that can carry out  large‑scale experiments  and collect more data.

A virtuous circle eases  data woes

Widespread deployment  of robots leads to a  steadily increasing  deluge of robotics data.  This helps accelerate  advances, providing  a further boost to  deployment and  creating a virtuous circle  of progress. The robotics  companies that build  the devices are the  greatest beneficiaries.

The data crunch is over

Data access ceases to  be a significant problem  due to the vast amounts  being produced by  widely deployed  robots and more  data-efficient training  approaches. Data is no  longer a differentiator,  encouraging private  companies to open up  their datasets, providing  a boost to academic  research.
<<<END_PAGE_62>>>

<<<PAGE_63>>>
Robotics and Embodied Intelligence

1.4.4 Human-robot interaction

Most industrial robots today are deliberately isolated from workers due  to safety concerns. But ideally we would like robots to work seamlessly  alongside, or even in coordination with, humans.

At the most basic level, there has been progress on “human-aware” navigation  algorithms that allow robots to safely occupy the same space as people.56  Collaborative robots, or “cobots”, are also capable of simple interactions like  object handovers.57 But more sophisticated forms of human interaction are  facilitated by deep reservoirs of implicit knowledge about social etiquette, and  efforts to imbue this understanding and corresponding behaviour in machines  remain rudimentary.58

LLMs present a promising opportunity to chip away at these challenges by  allowing humans to interface with robots through natural language.59 There is  even tentative evidence that they have limited ability to model the mental states  of humans.60 The outputs of these models can be inconsistent and unreliable,  though, which makes them unsafe to deploy in many real-world situations.

Understanding how humans interact with robots, both physically and  psychologically, and what their expectations of the technology are, is also  crucial.61,62,63 Better understanding of how integrating robots into groups of  humans impacts social dynamics is also needed.64 There is already evidence that  the use of robots in social care can have unintended consequences that harm  those they are supposed to help.65 And given the prevalence of bias in AI training  data, robots could replicate existing patterns of discrimination.66,67 Developing  socially adept robots which feel empathy, exhibit moral reasoning and act  accordingly may also require them to be able to feel pain, raising many ethical  questions.68 Establishing legal guidelines and frameworks to address the rights  and responsibilities of autonomous robots will be required.

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Cobots enter the workplace

Human-aware  navigation is solved,  making it possible for  robots to be physically  integrated into everyday  life. LLMs allow people  to have more complex  and intuitive interactions  with robots. Initial  prototypes of robots with  basic pain and empathy  systems are developed.  Collaborative robots  become more common  in the workplace, though  only in the most routine  jobs. Avatars — remote  representations of real  people — enable wider  distribution of highly  skilled services such as  healthcare. However,  the rapid introduction  of robots into society  requires more agile  governance to respond  to emerging challenges.

Robots start to read  human intention

Autonomous robots  have a rudimentary  ability to understand  human intentions and  adapt to them. They  also grasp basic social  etiquette, such as turn- taking in conversations.  Collaborative robots are  able to take on more  complex jobs when  paired with a human  expert who can guide  the machine. There is  increased adoption of  empathetic robots in  caregiving, education  and companionship  roles.

Humans and robots adapt  to each other

Humans and robots  are able to interact  seamlessly and work  side by side in most  environments. Robots  have developed  sophisticated social  intelligence and self- awareness, able to  understand and respond  to human emotions,  while humans have  adapted to the ways in  which robotic “cognition”  is different from the way  in which humans think.

59
<<<END_PAGE_63>>>

<<<PAGE_64>>>
QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI PULSE OF SCIENCE

QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI PULSE OF SCIENCE

60

1.5

Extended Reality

CHAIR:   Karthik Ramani

Donald W. Feddersen Distinguished Professor of  Mechanical Engineering; Professor of Electrical  and Computer Engineering, and Professor of  Educational Studies, College of Education, at  Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana

CONTRIBUTORS:   Andrea Stevenson Won, Daniel Cremers,  Ruofei Du, Steven Feiner, Ryo Suzuki,  Sriram Subramanian

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

“Extended reality”, or XR, promises to create  immersive digital experiences that seamlessly blend  real and virtual elements, digitally altering the  everyday human experience of reality.

It encompasses several overlapping technologies.  These include virtual-reality (VR) headsets that  transport wearers to simulated worlds, “augmented  reality” (AR) systems that overlay digital information  onto a user’s view of the real world via a mobile app  or smart glasses, and “mixed reality” (MR) devices  that transpose interactive virtual elements into  the user’s field of vision.1 Consumer headsets are  already bringing VR entertainment to the masses,  with more advanced offerings from providers such  as Meta, Apple and Google also providing some MR  functionality.2,3 Although prior investments were  made by Microsoft and Apple, AR systems have  seen limited uptake by the military and industry,4,5  while simpler AR smart glasses that look like regular  eyewear are proving popular with consumers.6,7

Recent demos of advanced smart glasses by  Meta and Google, which squeeze cutting-edge  XR functionality into a sleek form factor, show the  technology’s potential.8,9 However, these remain  research prototypes, highlighting the field’s  long‑standing challenges with commercial viability.   It seems the commercial players are looking to get  feedback from users and also create ecosystems   to develop applications for their devices, similar   to what we have witnessed for smartphones. Creating  capable, comfortable and reasonably priced XR  hardware, along with the software and infrastructure  to support widespread use, will require huge  investment.10 So far companies have struggled to find  mass-scale consumer use-cases that could justify the  sums required.

However, advances in AI have given the field a  boost. Breakthroughs in spatial computing, gesture  recognition and language understanding, all of which  are powered by AI, promise to boost the capabilities  of XR devices. Simultaneously, AI developers are  hunting for devices that can take full advantage  of the technology’s rapidly improving visual and  language skills — a new field called visual-language  is developing very fast. Smart glasses not only allow  the hands to be free but also view the world through  the wearer’s eyes, opening up the prospect of an  always‑on AI assistant. Such an assistant will be able  to seamlessly answer in any language users’ questions  about the physical world the user is interacting with,  while providing a personalised digital overlay of  information in all modalities and 3D, dynamic, visual  augmentations.

The blurring of the boundaries between the  physical and digital worlds would entail and hold  unknown and potentially enormous implications  for society. However, achieving this vision will still  require significant hardware advances to balance  the competing pressures of performance, cost,  and wearability.11,12 Significant advances also have  to be made that make it easy to both author or  create and use virtual content for XR devices.13  Meanwhile, developers will need to identify more  targeted early use-cases to drive the investment  needed to make fully fledged XR a consumer  technology. Gaming, immersive and hands-on  education,14 manufacturing,15 athletic coaching and  spectatorship,16 and medical training17 appear to be  promising options, each with its own unique contexts  and challenges for uptake.
<<<END_PAGE_64>>>

<<<PAGE_65>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS

Advances in display technology, wearable sensors,  computer vision and AI mean that humans’ everyday  experience of reality will increasingly become  an integrated mix of inputs from the real world  and digital sources. Continuing convergence of  these technologies and breakthroughs in Spatial  computing are making it possible for AI-powered  XR devices to seamlessly merge complex virtual  elements into the user’s view of the real world.  Realistic immersive experiences will require systems  able to truly understand and reason about their  environment, and while these capabilities are  rudimentary now they are improving fast. It will  also be crucial to create intuitive XR interfaces  that can dynamically adapt to the user’s needs.  New control modalities and wearable sensors  are making personalisation and adaptation  increasingly possible, though context-aware XR  systems remain some way off. Advances in AI, from  three-dimensional computer vision to multimodal  interfaces, are also opening up the prospect of  populating XR environments with smart “agents”  or creating intelligent and spatially aware digital  assistants. Our understanding of Human-AI  interaction in the spatial world remains rudimentary.  These interactions also continue to improve with  spatial computational technologies, devices and  algorithms. Additionally, these possibilities raise a  host of practical and ethical questions. While current  commercial XR technology is primarily audio‑visual,  emerging Haptics and multisensory interfaces in  research could soon add touch, taste and even smell  to future virtual experiences. In the near term these  could boost the realism of immersive experiences,  but a more distant goal is to compose multisensory  narratives that boost immersion.

ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

1.5 	 Extended Reality

SUB-TOPICS

1.5.1	 Spatial computing

1.5.2	 XR interfaces

1.5.3	 Human-AI interaction

1.5.4	 Haptics and multisensory   Interfaces

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

Extended Reality has seen rapid advances in  the last few years, and major breakthroughs in  Spatial computing and immersive computing  are expected in the coming five years. Haptics  and multisensory interfaces still require another  10 years of research and development before  they reach maturity. The successful integration  of systems that combine human and artificial  intelligence will be needed to make XR devices  truly transformative. Overall, this is an area with  high scope for action in the present.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/ext-real

61
<<<END_PAGE_65>>>

<<<PAGE_66>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

PULSE OF SCIENCE

QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

62

Extended Reality

1.5.1 Spatial computing

To convincingly merge complex virtual elements with real‑world  environments, XR devices will need to understand and interact with their  surroundings. These capabilities will be powered by AI that can use various  sensor technologies to create and use spatial content while perceiving and  reasoning spatially.

Algorithmic advances now make it possible to use inexpensive cameras  and motion sensors to simultaneously track a device’s location and map its  surroundings.18 Advanced computer vision can also convert 2D images captured  from moving cameras into detailed 3D models of spaces and objects19,20 and use  them to reconstruct photorealistic 3D scenes from any point of view,21,22 enabling  the virtualisation of entire environments. AI can also layer these 3D models with  semantic labels that categorise objects and features within the environment,23  and seamlessly integrate virtual elements into scenes by allowing them to  collide with or be occluded by real-world objects.24 Many of these capabilities  are now integrated into freely available software development kits from large  technology and gaming companies.25,26

However, developing a truly immersive XR experience will require AI models  that can go beyond simply mapping and reconstructing 3D environments to  understanding and reasoning about them. Fortunately, solving these problems  will be crucial for a wide range of AI applications, including self-driving cars,  robots and drones, so considerable resources are already going into this  problem. Vision-language models trained on large amounts of image and  text data appear capable of some degree of spatial reasoning.27,28 But “world  models”, which learn rich representations of an environment’s spatial and  physical properties to make predictions of how it will evolve over time, could  be even more promising.29,30

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

3D reconstruction and  geometric reasoning  progresses rapidly

In the near term, low‑cost  headsets become  commercially viable  at higher scale. Then  the demand for better  spatial‑computing  capabilities from a range  of AI-application areas  drives rapid progress in  3D reconstruction and  geometric reasoning. This  brings some high‑value  XR use cases, such as  in manufacturing and  production, into practical  reach, making the field  increasingly commercially  attractive and spurring  major new investments.

XR goes mainstream

XR achieves mainstream  adoption and becomes  widely used in retail,  education and  healthcare. Highly  realistic and physically  accurate “digital twins”  of real-world objects  and locations become  widely used by urban  planners, engineers  and manufacturers for  real-time monitoring,  design and process  optimisation.

Virtual and physical reality  are intermeshed

The boundaries between  virtual and physical reality  dissolve. Everyday objects  and environments have  persistent digital layers  that are accessible  and modifiable  through XR devices,  and virtual elements  are permanently and  seamlessly interwoven  into physical reality. XR  evolves from immersive  simulations to a  foundational platform  for human experience,  transforming learning,  creativity, work and  entertainment.
<<<END_PAGE_66>>>

<<<PAGE_67>>>
Extended Reality

1.5.2 XR interfaces

Creating immersive virtual experiences will require technology that is highly  adaptive to the user and their needs. While the rich body of evolving research  on human-computer interaction provides a solid foundation,31 XR interfaces  will have to take account of the unique and different ways that humans  interact with their spatial environment in different contexts.32

Many XR headsets today come with handheld controllers, but interaction is  becoming increasingly multimodal. On many devices, camera-based gesture  recognition and eye tracking allow users to interact with virtual elements  through simple hand movements or by using their visual focus as a cursor.  Beyond providing more intuitive control options, the wide range of sensors  embedded in leading XR devices can provide powerful insights into the user’s  attention, intent and actions.

Machine-learning models can analyse eye-tracking data and ego-centric  video captured by XR devices to infer what activity a user is engaged in33,34 or  even to infer their intention to interact with both virtual and physical objects.35  Eye‑tracking data can also provide a window into the user’s attention and level  of engagement.36 When combined with basic physiological monitoring, it can  also help to monitor the user’s cognitive load while carrying out tasks in XR.37

By combining these user-centric insights with spatial information, virtual  elements and control interfaces can be adapted to the user’s immediate  context in real time.38 This can be used to both improve the usability of virtual  interfaces39 and overlay helpful information and control options onto real-world  objects.40,41 It can even reduce the need for real-world physical interfaces, given  the advances in “internet of things” connectivity between XR devices and the  physical world. It can also make it possible for XR systems to detect when the  user’s ability to interact with specific controls and interfaces is impaired by  things like poor lighting, noise or multi-tasking, and adapt accordingly.42

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

XR experience becomes  highly fluid and intuitive

Rapid improvements  in the ability to track  hands, face and eyes  make it possible to pick  up almost imperceptible  physical cues that  indicate the user’s  attention, intention  and emotional state.  This is used to power  highly adaptive user  interfaces that make XR  experiences even more  fluid and intuitive than  real life.

XR becomes globally  available

Hardware advances make  lightweight, affordable  and energy-efficient  devices as common  as smartphones. AI  embedded in these  devices makes it possible  to provide context-aware  experiences, making  real-time environmental  adjustments to  personalise content to  the user’s needs and  situation.

Users’ thoughts directly  interface with XR

Brain-computer  interfaces become the  predominant interface  for XR, allowing users to  control and experience  virtual environments  via thought alone.  This dramatically  improves accessibility  of XR technology  and enables users to  visualise, manipulate and  inhabit information and  environments in ways  that are intuitive and  deeply personalised.

63
<<<END_PAGE_67>>>

<<<PAGE_68>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

PULSE OF SCIENCE

QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

64

Extended Reality

1.5.3 Human-AI interaction

XR technologies will make it possible for humans to interact with AI agents  embodied in both physical and virtual environments. This could enable  powerful new forms of AI-human collaboration but will require major  advances in both the fundamental capabilities of agents and their ability   to interact smoothly with the user.

The rapidly improving reasoning and decision-making capabilities of large  language models now allow them to take control of simulated bodies in virtual  environments to solve a variety of tasks.43,44 The ability of these embodied  “agents” to communicate in natural language also enables them to collaborate  with each other, as well as with humans, to tackle challenges.45 This is opening  up the prospect of populating virtual environments with interactive AI  characters for both entertainment and to act as digital co-workers.46 Integrating  agents into XR devices and providing them with access to their suite of sensors  could also enable always-on digital assistants that see the world through the  user’s eyes.47

Considerable challenges remain. Even today’s most powerful models exhibit  only limited embodied intelligence,48 and our understanding of how AI and  humans interact remains rudimentary.49 Evidence suggests that creating useful  digital assistants is challenging, and poorly designed AI can often hinder rather  than help.50,51

Nonetheless, the possibility raises a host of practical and ethical questions.  Should AI agents be embodied in human form, and how will their appearance  and personality reinforce social biases? Will users control their own agents, or  will they be services provided by companies? Should agents be able to augment  how others perceive the user in virtual spaces, adjusting their appearance,  movements and even speech? And if agents can digitally alter the user’s XR  environment to boost immersion or enhance productivity, how do we ensure  this doesn’t lead to deception or manipulation?52

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

AI agents become a  common XR feature

AI-powered virtual  agents that can  communicate in  natural language and  demonstrate spatial  understanding become  a common feature of XR  experiences. AI is able to  dynamically enhance the  appearance of the user’s  3D representation, or  avatar, in virtual spaces to  enhance communication  and improve social  experiences.

XR users enjoy an  always‑on virtual assistant

XR devices featuring  embedded AI agents  with access to the full  suite of sensors become  commonplace. This  provides users with  an always-on virtual  assistant that can help  with everyday tasks in the  real world and augment  their perception with  useful information and  helpful virtual elements.  The AI can even assist  with real-time control  of the user’s avatar in  virtual spaces, making  movements more  graceful or modifying  their speech to make it  more fluent.

Users’ everyday reality   is powered by XR

The use of AI-powered  XR devices becomes  so ubiquitous that  the technology is no  longer seen as a virtual  assistant but instead as a  natural part of the user.  AI mediates people’s  perception around  the clock, making it a  fundamental component  of their everyday reality.  These tools increasingly  exert control over the   way people behave in   the real world as well as   in virtual spaces. .
<<<END_PAGE_68>>>

<<<PAGE_69>>>
Extended Reality

1.5.4 Haptics and multisensory interfaces

Current XR technology is primarily audio-visual, but this is unlikely to  remain the case in the future. Emerging haptic technology promises to  boost immersion by adding a variety of new sensory experiences to virtual  environments.53

A wide range of wearable haptic devices has been developed to simulate  various tactile sensations such as pressure, texture and temperature.54 These  include gloves, vests and bracelets that rely on a variety of approaches to  generate tactile illusions, such as vibrating electromechanical devices, electrical  stimulation or shape-changing materials. These devices can be cumbersome,  though, which is spurring growing interest in “mid-air haptics”, which uses  ultrasound beams to stimulate the skin and generate highly modifiable tactile  sensations without physical contact.55,56 Another emerging approach involves  using mobile robots to simulate virtual objects57 or even reconfiguring physical  environments to match the virtual one.58

Simulating the chemical senses of taste and smell is now becoming feasible.  So‑called gustatory interfaces are making it possible to recreate taste sensations  in virtual experiences.59,60 Olfactory interfaces can be combined with software  that is able to recreate how smells evolve over space and time.61,62

In the near term, haptic technology could play an important role enhancing  the realism of mixed-reality training in fields like medicine.63 But in the future  it could also make XR experiences more immersive and boost their emotional  depth.64,65,66 However, this will require us to move away from using isolated  haptic stimuli as an accessory to audio-visual experiences and instead   to work out how sequences of sensations can be combined to compose  multisensory narratives.

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

XR experiences are  commonly multisensory

Lightweight and  power‑efficient  wearable haptic  devices, combined with  increasingly compact  mid-air haptic set‑ups,  make it commonplace  for XR experiences  to be multisensory.  Olfactory stimuli are  increasingly used to  deepen immersion in  XR environments by  replicating distinctive  smells associated with  specific locations.

Virtual and real experiences  become increasingly similar

Advances in haptics and  multisensory interfaces  provide senses of touch,  force feedback and  smell that are so realistic  that virtual experiences  are increasingly  indistinguishable  from real ones. Haptic  feedback is provided by a  combination of wearable  devices and robots that  dynamically reconfigure  the user’s physical  environment. Researchers  codify the “language” of  smell and taste, making  it possible to use these  senses to evoke nuanced  and highly personal  emotional responses   in users.

Brain-computer   interfaces evoke realistic  multisensory experiences

The advent of  XR mediated by  brain‑computer  interfaces allows direct  control of the user’s  senses. This makes  it possible to evoke  multisensory experiences  that are identical to  those experienced in the  real world. It may even  be possible to achieve  heightened levels of  sensory experience   not accessible in  everyday life.

65
<<<END_PAGE_69>>>

<<<PAGE_70>>>
QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI PULSE OF SCIENCE

QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI PULSE OF SCIENCE

66

1.6

Collective Intelligence

CHAIR:   Geoff Mulgan

Professor of Collective Intelligence, Public Policy   and Social Innovation, UCL, London

CONTRIBUTORS:   Seth Bullock, Mirta Galesic, Martin Kornberger,  Thomas Malone, Lex Paulson, Mark Steyvers,  Anita Woolley

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

The field of Collective Intelligence (CI) is founded  on the principle that when people come together  to solve problems, the sum can be greater than  its parts. It aims to improve understanding of the  dynamics underpinning human collaboration and  to enhance and guide these processes to tackle the  world’s biggest challenges.

CI is an emerging field, drawing from a broad  range of disciplines including biology, psychology,  economics and computer science.1 That said, CI  methods are already widely used in various fields,  such as citizen science, experiments in democracy,  mobilising consumers for product design and  predictions in finance.

The methods of CI make it possible to look more  systematically at how teams, organisations and even  entire communities think, observe, analyse, plan and  create. Better understanding of these processes can  then be used to help groups think more successfully.

Principles from CI are being applied in areas as varied  as organisational design, citizen science and open  democracy, and can help to improve everything  from social-media moderation to predicting and  responding to natural disasters. Harnessing CI could  provide a new, more inclusive and more effective  model for global governance,2 and play a vital role  in tackling climate change,3 the UN’s Sustainable  Development Goals4 and a host of other thorny  societal problems.5

In the past decade, there has been significant  growth in the use of technology to enhance the CI  of groups both large and small.6 This ranges from  web platforms designed to coordinate large-scale  collaboration to the use of AI to facilitate group  discussions. Crowdsourcing information or small  chunks of work from large numbers of people  can tackle challenges as varied as training AI and  predicting floods.7

Citizen-science projects engage the general  public to help scientists collect and analyse  data. Open innovation platforms like Kaggle and  InnoCentive let companies outsource engineering  challenges to independent experts. Deliberative  democracy is involving everyday citizens in political  decision‑making in countries.8 The advent of AI  chatbots and agents has created a powerful new  way for humans to interface with machines, making  it increasingly important to consider how AI-human  teams will operate in the future.

However, efforts to apply ideas from CI in the  real world are piecemeal. The vast majority of  organisations are failing to employ simple principles  that could significantly enhance their effectiveness,  suggesting a need for more translational research.  And where there are attempts to harness CI, the  practice is often well ahead of the theory. Significant  research is required to improve our understanding  of the fundamentals underpinning CI and how to  design and apply new tools to enhance it. Current  models of collective action have delivered innovation,  but they themselves have remained remarkably  unchanged over centuries; the field of collective  intelligence seeks to challenge and alter these  paradigms.9
<<<END_PAGE_70>>>

<<<PAGE_71>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS

Solving the world’s biggest challenges will require  input from large numbers of people with diverse  experience and expertise, all of whom must be  able to work collaboratively. The field of Collective  Intelligence (CI) seeks to understand the theory  and practice of human cooperation to make this  a reality. Thanks to digital technology, Large-scale  collaboration can now be used to solve scientific  challenges, innovate new ideas and even revitalise  democracy. But organisations and institutions  need to be redesigned to help put these ideas into  action. Insights into group dynamics and new tools  are helping create Smarter teams in a time when  working practices are in flux. Increasingly powerful  AI agents could soon play a vital supporting role  and may eventually become team members  themselves. But continuing progress is reliant on  better models of Collective cognition — how groups  “think” as a unit. The theoretical underpinnings of  CI are fragmented, which is holding back efforts to  understand and enhance these processes. Attempts  to use technology to boost CI also require advances  in Human-computer interaction research. Our  understanding of how people perceive and use  decision-making tools remains piecemeal and  AI is a long way from exhibiting the kind of social  intelligence required to operate seamlessly alongside  human teammates.

ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

1.6 	 Collective Intelligence

SUB-TOPICS

1.6.1	 Large-scale collaboration

1.6.2	 Smarter teams

1.6.3	 Collective cognition

1.6.4	 Human-computer interaction

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

There is little consensus on how to advance towards  Collective cognition, increasing the uncertainty  associated with this sub-topic and pushing  up its Anticipation Potential score. Large‑scale  collaboration is another area of Collective Intelligence  which scores highly, mainly due to the expected  transformative effects of future advances on  science and technology, and the requirement for  more coordinated international action to drive  breakthroughs.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/ext-real

67
<<<END_PAGE_71>>>

<<<PAGE_72>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

PULSE OF SCIENCE

QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

68

Collective Intelligence

1.6.1 Large-scale collaboration

Digital technology allows collaboration on scales unimaginable in the past.  This has led to a reimagining of how humans can organise themselves to  solve problems.

New tools for gathering and visualising data, and open-source repositories   of information and tools are helping enhance the Collective Intelligence (CI)  of large groups. AI is also playing a growing role in facilitating CI by filtering  complex data, organising human knowledge and optimising deliberative  processes.10 Powerful large language models (LLMs) trained on reams of internet  data both encapsulate the CI of millions and can actively support CI by making  it easier for people to engage with deliberative and collaborative processes.11,12  Caution is needed because overuse could also lead to a homogenisation of  perspectives and illusions of consensus, but there have been notable successes  such as the Habermas Machine from Google DeepMind,13 which started with  participants submitting written opinions on a question, used the AI to generate  group statements and then asked participants to rate and critique them. The  machine then refined the statements until the group was satisfied. Another  example is SocraSynth, which combines LLMs to help groups think, synthesise  and develop more complex solutions to problems.14

While CI has shown promise for generating novel solutions, existing  decision‑making processes are often too slow and inflexible to take full  advantage. This is prompting calls to apply the principles of CI to overhaul  corporate structure and culture,15 and to reimagine democratic processes.16,17  Efforts are already under way to design organisations and institutions  that actively promote and harness CI to help with multiple aspects of, and  approaches to, thought at scale — including observation, interpretation,  memory, prediction and creativity.18 Decentralisation technologies like  blockchain and quadratic voting also open up avenues for enhancing CI by  helping run organisations in a distributed and non-hierarchical fashion.19

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

CI approaches gain traction

CI-based thinking  becomes more  ingrained in everyday  life, with many tools  that originated in CI  emerging to help people  deal with a range of  issues, such as getting  support for specific  medical conditions,  DIY home repairs and  business or personal  mentoring. Increasingly  powerful language  and vision AI gradually  displaces humans in  many crowdsourcing  and citizen-science  applications.

CI applications grow

Tools from CI start to be  applied in mainstream  applications, as well  as helping large-scale  approaches to tackling  global challenges such as  climate change, access  to water and pandemic  response. Organisations  embrace new tools that  combine AI and CI to  better organise scientific  knowledge and bring  in perspectives from  more diverse groups.  The complicated  process of redesigning  institutions to better  harness CI begins,  although organisational  inertia and resistance  from vested interests  holds up progress.  Advanced AI agents  become ubiquitous,  requiring a shift in focus  to enhancing the CI of  human-AI groups.

Deliberative democracy  becomes widespread

Democratic assemblies  around the world  embrace the CI tools of  deliberative democracy  as standard practice,  helping to involve people  far beyond the elected  representatives in  political decision‑making.  Companies’ use of open  innovation to solve  problems becomes  mainstream.
<<<END_PAGE_72>>>

<<<PAGE_73>>>
Collective Intelligence

1.6.2 Smarter teams

Most human collaboration happens in small groups and this is where the  core of CI research is focused. Building on previous work in organisational  psychology, behavioural economics and group dynamics, researchers are  now trying to understand and enhance the CI of teams.

This involves solving several challenges, including goal alignment, task  prioritisation, progress tracking, maintaining attention, distribution of  responsibilities and ensuring that deliberative processes are efficient  and equitable. This is becoming increasingly complicated, as more fluid  organisational structures mean team composition and structure is often  dynamic20. Globalisation and the rise of hybrid work also means teams  frequently work remotely and asynchronously, raising new challenges   for group cohesion.21

Nonetheless, research into group dynamics is providing simple yet powerful  insights into how to improve the CI of small groups. These include intermittent  breaks in collaboration,22 boosting the variety of solutions explored23 and  ensuring the right balance of cognitive diversity and gender.24,25 It is also  laying the foundations for new tools to enhance team performance. These  include real-time visualisations of how much effort members are putting in,26  information dashboards that summarise people’s skills27 and chatbots that  help teams allocate work based on members’ expertise.28

Recent breakthroughs in LLMs are also opening up the prospect of AI agents  working alongside humans in hybrid teams.29 These agents could be a crucial  tool for asynchronous collaboration, acting as a “shared brain” for the group  and keeping team dialogue flowing even when members can’t speak directly.  They could ultimately act as moderators, steering group deliberations to boost  CI. Adding AI to teams isn’t a silver bullet, though, and there’s evidence it can  degrade performance as often as improve it.30,31 This is driving researchers to  think more deeply about how the CI of human-AI groups differs and how to  harness it.32,33

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Understanding of team  structure and behaviour  aids CI

Researchers develop a  better understanding  of the team structures  and behaviours that  negatively impact CI,  making it possible to  develop strategies to  neutralise them. Simple  AI-powered facilitators  designed to lubricate  group deliberations  become commonplace.

AI moderates discussions

Decisions in crucial  areas like medicine and  criminal justice are made  by systems that combine  individual human  knowledge, orchestrated  CI and AI supervision.  More advanced AI  systems are now able to  moderate discussions  between groups of  humans in ways designed  to enhance CI.

Brain interfaces augment  human deliberation

A combination of AI  and crowd intelligence  provides the populace  with a form of “cognitive  autocomplete” via brain  interfaces that help them  quickly access important  information and  augment their ability  to deliberate.

69
<<<END_PAGE_73>>>

<<<PAGE_74>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

PULSE OF SCIENCE

QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

70

Collective Intelligence

1.6.3 Collective cognition

A better understanding of collective cognition — how groups of humans  “think” as a unit — will be critical for moving the field forward. Just as in  individuals, a group’s cognitive processes can be subdivided into various  components such as memory, attention and reasoning. But these operate   in very different ways at a group level, necessitating novel theories to   explain them.34,35

Research has shown that collective cognition is not uniform and is shaped by  the social structures in which the groups operate.36 Groups in the real world  also have to navigate numerous, disparate and ever-changing challenges,  which means they are in a constant process of adaption.37 One particularly  understudied aspect of collective cognition is the role of narrative. Stories are  central to the way groups coalesce around particular goals or shared visions  of reality, which is an essential precursor to any form of collective reasoning.38  Increasing use of technology to enhance Collective Intelligence (CI) also  necessitates the development of new metrics of collective cognition that can  be used by digital platforms or AI to improve group collaboration.

While there has been progress on defining and even measuring CI itself,39  decisions about what characterises “intelligent” group behaviour often remain  subjective. Establishing what we mean by “intelligence” may be a precursor to  being able to explain and improve CI.40,41 Taking a multidisciplinary approach  that pools knowledge from biology, computer science and the social sciences  will be crucial for developing a holistic view of CI.42 The life sciences in particular  are providing exciting insights into the role CI plays in organising everything  from cells to entire animal populations.43,44

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Coherent theory   of CI emerges

Academic research  delineates the various  national, cultural and  social influences on  collective cognition,  paving the way for a  coherent theory of  human CI. Attempts  to harness CI for  practical applications  are increasingly  informed by CI theory.  A more integrated  evolutionary theory of  collective intelligence,  combining archaeology,  primatology, psychology  and computer science,  among other disciplines,  begins to emerge.

Metrics quantify CI

Data-gathering from  online collective activities  allows researchers to  develop metrics for  different aspects of CI,  producing better models  of collective cognition  and acting as input  for CI-enhancing tools.  Large-scale collection  of stories from different  communities is used  to train AI, which can  then help analyse the  narratives driving the  collective cognition of  society at large.

CI theory incorporates  machines

Comprehensive models  of collective cognition  make it possible to boost  the effectiveness of both  small and large groups  of humans. CI theory is  broadened to incorporate  increasingly intelligent  machines in theories of  collective cognition.
<<<END_PAGE_74>>>

<<<PAGE_75>>>
Collective Intelligence

1.6.4 Human-computer interaction

Using technology to enhance Collective Intelligence (CI) will require  breakthroughs in the theory and practice of human-computer interaction.  Computer systems designed to facilitate decision-making have a long  history, but have often foundered due to a failure to understand how humans  use and perceive such technology. To avoid the mistakes of the past, it is  crucial to base the design of interactive systems on fundamental theories  of human behaviour.45

There is considerable excitement around LLMs, which have opened up an  intuitive new way for humans to interface with computers through natural  language. But AI struggles with certain challenging aspects of human  interaction. Human decision-making is highly context-dependent, for instance,  and that context is not static. Group interactions are also governed by subtle  cues and complex social conventions.

AI researchers have made some progress in understanding context46 and  gesture recognition,47 and there is growing evidence that LLMs have a  rudimentary ability to model human mental states (known as theory of  mind).48 Multimodal AI models that can interpret more than just text present  a promising direction for developing more context-aware AI.49 But imbuing  machines with true social intelligence remains a distant goal and will require  a multidisciplinary effort spanning the social, behavioural and natural  sciences.50,51 A concerted effort is also needed to improve our understanding  of how humans perceive and interact with conversational AI.52

In addition, AI chatbots raise significant privacy and security concerns.53  Also, their propensity for sycophancy54 and their tendency to confidently assert  incorrect information, or “hallucinate”, makes it essential to ensure people  understand the technology’s limits so that they don’t become overly trusting  of it.55 As technology increasingly mediates group interactions it will also be  important to measure whether it is enhancing human capabilities or causing  them to atrophy.

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Improved interaction boosts  effectiveness

Renewed focus on  improving how humans  interact with CI tools  significantly improves  the tools’ effectiveness.  The increasing use of  technology to boost  human collaboration  prompts efforts to begin  monitoring its impact on  human behaviour and  relations.

AI breakthroughs bring  more effective collaboration

Breakthroughs in key  AI capabilities like  context awareness and  continual learning make  it possible for CI tools to  adapt to users and more  effectively guide human  collaboration. Evidence  that some efforts to  harness CI are actually  causing humans’ skills  to atrophy prompts a  refocusing of efforts  on tools that enhance  human capabilities rather  than replacing them.

Artificial agents join  collaborative teams

Advances in AI make  it possible to imbue AI  with a true theory of  mind, allowing artificial  agents to become equal  members in AI-human  teams. CI-literate AI is  used to represent the  interests of nature —  forests or ocean  ecosystems, say — or to  represent the interests  of future generations.  Organisations such as the  Intergovernmental Panel  on Climate Change and  UN use human‑AI teams  to aid cross-cultural  negotiations.

71
<<<END_PAGE_75>>>

<<<PAGE_76>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

72 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

INVITED CONTRIBUTION

The challenges   of digital archiving

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-ic-1

Jane Winters

Professor of Digital Humanities and Director  of the Digital Humanities Research Hub at  the School of Advanced Study, University of  London, UK
<<<END_PAGE_76>>>

<<<PAGE_77>>>
Many people think of the web, email, social media  and other forms of digital communication as  somewhat ephemeral — certainly not as weighty  and solid as the books, letters, buildings and  historical artefacts that make up our valued cultural  history. But in fact, these material objects can be  lost or destroyed, and while copying offers some  protection, it is often laborious and imperfect.

Digital data, on the other hand, can be copied  accurately and repeatedly, and can be accessed  in perpetuity if appropriately stored, maintained  and preserved.

But that is far from what is happening. Much of the  data our actions generate today — ever more of which  exists only in digital form — vanishes quickly. From  a historian’s perspective, it is absolutely essential  that we archive this “born digital” material in all its  ever-changing complexity. If we can grab and store  it now, today’s researchers can use it to explore how  our culture and society are developing, while their  successors will find it invaluable in understanding  our times retrospectively.

As an example, consider the study of recent elections  in the Global North. It is impossible to make sense of  the campaigns and results without understanding  how social media has affected how people form their  world‑views. But there is no systematic archiving  of this data — certainly not in forms that offer  accessibility and permanence. Much of the history  of computing and the web has already been lost,  trapped on degrading and inaccessible media,  discarded by corporate fiat or never stored in the  first place.

So how, in the digital age, do we curate our history  and give it permanence? To date, most of the work  done has focused on simply archiving the material.  Websites disappear all the time, and hacking  interventions or high-level decisions can cause  government bodies or companies to lose or discard  years’ worth of data. That makes it important for us  to capture all of this material now — we can start to  think about what we do with it once it is safely stored.

There is already a substantive archive of digital  material in the Internet Archive’s Wayback Machine,  which started archiving the web in late 1996, and  many national memory institutions also have  significant web archives. But there are other things  to capture, such as social media, emails, memes —  plus the algorithms that select which content gets  delivered. Ideally, our archives would include not just  the communication itself, but how it was shared, used  and reused. Only then can we really start to think  about how it might have affected people’s behaviours,  experiences and futures.

With social media, there is the dynamic aspect to  consider. Capturing a post at a time when it has  only been liked twice, before it goes viral, means you  haven’t really captured its meaning and context at  all. There is good work under way here: for example,  Valérie Schafer at the Luxembourg Centre for  Contemporary and Digital History, University of  Luxembourg, led a team aiming to find ways to  archive such virality, capturing memes and the ways  in which they circulate, so that we can understand  more about how information and ideas are  distributed in the digital age.

There are many challenges facing the field —  including legal issues. In many countries, national  libraries’ and archiving institutions’ web-archiving  activities are conducted on the basis of legal deposit  legislation, which gives a sound legal footing on which  to crawl the web and to store contents without having  to ask permission. Such legislation doesn’t exist in  some countries, however, meaning that archiving is  only possible where permission has been granted,  making its scope very limited. In other cases the  legislation treats an archived web page as if it were  a physical book — a single object that two people  can’t both access simultaneously, even though it was  once accessible to any and all on the public internet.  Some workarounds do exist: researchers based in a  Danish research institution can apply to have remote  access to an archive held at the Royal Danish Library,  for example. But the web is largely archived — with  the exception of the Internet Archive — on a national  domain basis.

73
<<<END_PAGE_77>>>

<<<PAGE_78>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

74 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Privacy laws add a layer of complexity to the storage  of web archives and emails. The UK National Archives  is doing interesting work to try to make sure that  personal information can be stripped out so that  the records can be opened up to the public at the  appropriate time; this might be relevant to the  archiving of digital culture. Often, though, people  simply aren’t aware that their online presence is  being preserved as part of a national heritage,  and we need to find ways to make sure we aren’t  showcasing people who don’t want to be put on  display. We also need to make sure that such records  come from diverse sources and represent a broad  swathe of our societies.

Another challenge is in the infrastructure required  to archive our digital existences. The cloud-based  storage requirements for the petabytes of data  are huge and growing, and ever more video and  audio streaming means that this will continue  to mushroom. The costs of storing all this are  environmental as well as financial, and in practice  we need to consider what we’re choosing to store,  especially since there can be a huge amount  of duplication. Indexing and discoverability is a  significant challenge for digital archiving, especially  when multiple copies or versions of web pages are  being stored. How do we differentiate between them  and make accessing specific data easier — while also  appending metadata about how and when it was  created, used and shared?

It may well be that, suitably directed, AI is able to  perform some of the detailed analysis work required  for this. But AI is also an object of study in itself.   Just as historians study the industrial revolution  through its objects and artefacts, we are beginning  to study the similarly disruptive revolution that AI will  bring. But we need to understand the infrastructures  that are delivering AI, as well as the information it  processes and how those processes are shaped by  algorithms. That means creating frameworks for the  archiving of what Richard Sandford at University  College London has described as algorithmic  heritage, among other endeavours.

All of this means there is a need for programmers  and other skilled technologists in this area. The  Portuguese web archive has just completed  a technical initiative which has reanimated  Flash‑based websites, which had been abandoned  after the technology became obsolete, for instance.  Many more such projects will be required if we are  to store a truly representative set of digital artefacts.  That includes learning how to preserve and work with  “hybrid” archives that include hard drives, floppy   disks and online data as well as printed and  manuscript materials.

There is also a danger of huge inequities arising  in terms of geography and wealth. Web archiving  is primarily an activity in and of the Global North.  When we archive material related to something  like the COVID-19 pandemic, for which there was  an internationally coordinated set of activities, it is  important to ensure that we collect public-health  information, news bulletins and so on right from the  earliest days of the pandemic and from all around  the world — a huge challenge when so much more  material is readily accessible for countries in, say,  Europe compared with countries in Africa.
<<<END_PAGE_78>>>

<<<PAGE_79>>>
No archive has ever been truly representative:  archiving is always shaped by criteria that limit both  its scope and its relevance as times change and  cultural priorities shift. Digital archives will be no  different. But the more thought and resources we  can pour into them now, the more grateful future  historians — and perhaps future societies — will be.

It is urgent that we should do this work and do  it collectively, drawing on the knowledge and  experience of historians, archivists, technologists and  data scientists to ensure that at least some of our  digital present persists into the digital future. It will be  vital to invest in and sustain a community of practice  in the next decade, both to effectively globalise  born-digital archiving and to develop solutions  for emerging digital formats. What will succeed  generative AI, for example, and will we be prepared  to archive and preserve it when it emerges? By that  point, perhaps, we will have been able to combine  technological innovation with human skill and  imagination to make sense of the vast born‑digital  archives that document contemporary society  and culture. In doing so, we will gain insight into  the political, economic, health and environmental  challenges that mark the first quarter of the   21st century.

75
<<<END_PAGE_79>>>

<<<PAGE_80>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

76 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

INVITED CONTRIBUTION

AI and the law

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-ic-2

Urs Gasser

Professor of Public Policy, Governance and  Innovative Technology, and Dean, in the TUM  School of Social Sciences and Technology at the  Technical University of Munich, Germany
<<<END_PAGE_80>>>

<<<PAGE_81>>>
AI is transforming science, markets and human  capability — yet its most profound impact may lie in  how it compels us to reimagine the principles and  institutions by which we govern it. The future of AI  is not only a technical question. It is fundamentally  a normative and institutional one.

Anticipation is not only about racing to control   AI before it becomes uncontrollable. It is about   shaping the development of AI in ways that evolve  alongside, and remain grounded in, our values, legal  principles and social institutions. Rather than   fixating on hypothetical end-points, we propose  a pragmatic and generative frame: how can we  build systems of AI under the rule of law that make  our societies better, our decisions wiser and our  institutions more capable of learning? And at a  moment when the rule of law itself is under strain   n many parts of the world, we should also ask how  AI might be used — carefully and deliberately —  to strengthen the very legal foundations on which  open and just societies depend.

In that spirit, I outline three interlinked opportunities  for anticipatory work at the intersection of AI and law:

•	 the development of a next generation of  guard‑rails that support better decision‑making;

•	 the creation of learning institutions equipped for  experimental and shared governance;

•	 the reinvigoration of human flourishing as a  guiding principle for science and technology.

Next-generation guard-rails:   towards better decision-making

The past decade has revealed not a failure of law  itself but the consequences of misapplying outdated  assumptions about how the law operates in complex,  fast-changing environments. Too many regulatory  efforts have been shaped by a narrow, static view of  law as merely a tool for ex ante control or post hoc  sanctions, resulting in rules that are rigid, fragmented  and poorly attuned to the generative quality of digital  systems. These approaches often remain reactive and  superficial, addressing isolated risks while neglecting  the deeper socio-technical dynamics that shape  the development and use of technology. What  they lack is not authority but design: the flexibility,  embeddedness and iterative capacity needed to  guide AI in ways that are context-sensitive and  future-oriented.

What is needed instead is a new generation of  guard‑rails: not fixed constraints, but dynamic  governance instruments that ensure the trajectory  of AI remains in alignment with fundamental  societal values. These guard‑rails are not external  controls imposed after the fact; they are part of the  socio‑technical infrastructure in which AI systems   are conceived, designed and deployed, and must be  built to support better decision-making, both human  and automated.

This calls for governance mechanisms that are  anticipatory, adaptive and responsive to feedback.  Rather than aiming for exhaustive ex ante control,  such guard‑rails preserve agency and contestability  within evolving systems. They combine legal certainty  with procedural flexibility, enabling governance  systems to learn from real-world effects while  remaining anchored in legitimate boundaries.

Guard‑rails, in this view, are neither technocratic fixes  nor political stopgaps. They are enabling structures:  legal and institutional arrangements that facilitate  experimentation while preventing irreversible harm.  They offer an affirmative vision of governance — not  as a brake on innovation but as the foundation for  rights-compatible, trustworthy progress. Developing  such guard‑rails is a frontier for anticipatory research,  where legal theory, institutional design and technical  architecture must come together in sustained  dialogue.

77
<<<END_PAGE_81>>>

<<<PAGE_82>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

78 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

From a legal perspective, a core challenge lies in  reconciling contested and sometimes incompatible  principles. For example, the many legal and  philosophical notions of fairness — ranging from  equal treatment to equity of outcomes — cannot all  be operationalised simultaneously within AI systems.  This raises hard questions about prioritisation,  trade-offs and the role of law in mediating these  tensions. Similarly, foundational principles of  data protection, such as purpose limitation and  data minimisation, may be in tension with the  fundamentals of generative AI, which often relies on  broad, repurposed datasets and large-scale model  training. This creates a need for research into how  such principles can be reinterpreted, adapted or  safeguarded in ways that respect their normative  core while accommodating the technical realities   of AI development.

We are already seeing movement in this direction  through adaptive governance mechanisms such as  differentiated platform obligations for high-impact  platforms, participatory risk assessment models  that integrate stakeholder perspectives and iterative  codes of practice bridging normative principles with  evolving technical standards.

Learning institutions:   towards experimental and shared governance

Just as AI systems improve through iterative  refinement, so too must our institutions. Anticipatory  governance in the age of AI requires institutions  that can experiment, learn and evolve over time  without sacrificing democratic legitimacy or the  rule of law. This is a challenging proposition but not  an impossible one. Indeed, history offers numerous  examples of institutions that were designed to grow  into their mandates: from environmental agencies  that expanded to address climate change to  constitutional courts which adapted to digital rights.

Today, the urgency is to build institutions that are  explicitly primed for learning. This involves more  than simply scaling up technical expertise. It means  rethinking institutional design to allow for provisional  rule‑making, open-ended deliberation and robust  mechanisms of feedback and revision. It also means  ensuring that the outcomes of experimentation are  captured, interpreted and shared. Learning must  be social and cumulative, with institutions adapting  internally while enabling others across jurisdictions  and disciplines to benefit from the lessons they  generate.

This turns anticipatory governance into a distributed  endeavour. Learning institutions become sites of  both local experimentation and global exchange.  They provide a bridge between practice and policy,  translating technical developments into legal  categories and civic expectations. They make it  possible not only to govern what is known, but   toco-create responses to what is new and uncertain.  Emerging institutional formats such as anticipatory  sandboxes and foresight labs illustrate how  governance can be reimagined as a shared learning  process, where experimentation is structured,  monitored and scaled across jurisdictions.

Such institutions are essential not only for managing  risk but also for stewarding shared understanding.  They are the connective tissue between science,  technology and society — capable of interpreting  the social meaning of AI and fostering governance  cultures that are reflexive, collaborative and  open‑ended.

Flourishing humans: towards better societies

The final opportunity — perhaps the most  profound — is to ground the future of AI not in  efficiency or performance alone, but in human  flourishing. This requires a broader conception  of intelligence, one that does not reduce value to  accuracy of prediction, or progress to computational  speed, but recognises the importance of trust,  empathy, creativity, participation and well-being.  The design-for-values movement has sought to  embed societal and ethical principles directly into  technology design, while responsible research and
<<<END_PAGE_82>>>

<<<PAGE_83>>>
innovation frameworks extend this thinking into  research governance, emphasising anticipation,  reflexivity, inclusion and responsiveness. Both  approaches have shaped how values enter  technology development, but they also share  persistent challenges: translating abstract principles  into actionable design choices, reconciling competing  values and ensuring legitimacy over time.

Recent thinking shifts toward adaptive, participatory  and context-sensitive methods that treat values  not as fixed inputs but as elements to be revisited  and negotiated throughout the life cycle of AI  systems. This evolution aligns closely with the aim  of embedding human flourishing as a guiding  principle, making values not just a starting point but  a continuous thread in design, deployment   and governance.

In legal and democratic traditions, human flourishing  is not merely a philosophical ideal. It is a normative  bedrock. It is embedded in the principles of dignity,  autonomy and equality that underpin the rule of law,  and it offers a normative anchor for approaches such  as design for values and responsible innovation.   As AI systems increasingly mediate decision‑making  in education, health, employment and the public  sphere, the challenge is not only to integrate these  principles into technical design but also to protect  and advance them through institutional and legal  safeguards. This makes the pursuit of human  flourishing both a design challenge and   a governance lodestar.

Anticipating the future of law and legal systems  in an age of advanced AI requires looking beyond  technology alignment to institutional transformation.  As AI reshapes decision-making across domains, it  will also test the capacity of legal systems to uphold  dignity, autonomy, equality and other foundational  principles. This involves rethinkinghow legal

doctrines are interpreted in data-driven contexts,  how procedural safeguards like due process and  contestability are preserved when decisions are  automated, and how institutions can remain  adaptive without losing legitimacy. Digital-rights  frameworks, participatory governance processes  and co-regulatory instruments such as living codes  of practice offer early signs of how law can co-evolve  with AI, embedding normative commitments  into both system design and legal oversight. The  challenge is to ensure that, as AI evolves, legal  systems themselves become more capable of  learning, coordinating across jurisdictions and  stewarding human flourishing as a core purpose   of governance.

To seize all three of these opportunities, we must  integrate law, legal scholarship and governance  deeply into the anticipatory science and technology  agenda. This means treating legal thinking not  merely as a compliance checkpoint but as a source  of principles, procedures and institutional capacities  that can guide AI’s trajectory from the outset.

Science anticipation in this sense must be  interdisciplinary in substance, not just in form,  drawing on the procedural insights of law, the  adaptive capabilities of learning institutions and  the design methods that embed values into  technology. Priorities for research and practice  include the development of guard‑rails that reconcile  contested principles such as fairness and privacy,  the evaluation of adaptive legal frameworks that can  evolve alongside AI, and the design of institutional  models capable of cross-jurisdictional learning and  coordination.

By grounding science anticipation in the rule of law,  we gain not only mechanisms for managing risk but  a shared orientation: tools and traditions to guide us  in asking not only what is possible, but what is just.

79
<<<END_PAGE_83>>>

<<<PAGE_84>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

80 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

INVITED CONTRIBUTION

Creators’ rights   in the digital age

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-ic-3

Gérard Escher

Honorary Professor at the University of Geneva,  Switzerland, and Senior Advisor at GESDA

Andrea Boggio

Professor of Legal Studies at Bryant University in  Providence, Rhode Island
<<<END_PAGE_84>>>

<<<PAGE_85>>>
Creativity is at the core of innovation. It infuses  scientific and technological progress, along with  hard work, an abundance of failure punctuated by  occasional success, and a good provision of luck.  To support innovation, creators’ moral and material  rights have been generally recognised in law  since the 1886 adoption of the Berne Convention  and subsequently enshrined in international  human‑rights law under article 27.2 of the Universal  Declaration of Human Rights. So, too, has the  freedom of scientific and creative pursuit been  recognised, under article 27.1.

In a reversal of roles, technological progress can  undermine creators’ rights and thus hinder progress.  Recent developments in AI have shaken up creators’  rights, and we expect further transformations in the  years to come. The anticipated evolution towards  increasingly sophisticated AI agents capable of  perceiving the environment, making decisions and  taking actions autonomously to achieve specific  goals will probably redefine the boundaries of what  counts as creative work generated by humans.  Ensuring that human creativity is fully recognised  (in law and otherwise) as AI transforms the  landscape for innovation will be vital to scientific  and technological progress. To this end, we examine  the impacts of the AI revolution on two types of  creators — scientific authors and AI users who deploy  their creativity to generate AI outputs — to better  anticipate the future of creativity and innovation.

First, scientific authors. The published works of  scientists (along with literary and artistic productions)  are routinely used to train large language models  (LLMs) and other generative-AI models. Attribution  is possible and is typical of agentic AI (systems that  can make decisions without human intervention)  carrying out “deep research” or “reasoning.” These

AI outputs are more likely to attribute content to  the scientific sources used to produce that content.  However, in many other circumstances, outputs do  not include attributions to sources by default, even  if scientific sources were used to train the model. If  the source remains invisible and no attribution is  made, citations vanish. This has a double significance:  citations are both an engine of scientific enterprise  and a currency for scientists.

Attribution is an engine of science as a cumulative  endeavour. Knowledge builds on previous work.  Proper attribution allows researchers to position  their work within the existing scientific landscape,  demonstrating how their findings build upon,  challenge or synthesise previous discoveries. This  intellectual lineage is vital for the progress and  validation of scientific knowledge. Attribution is also  a currency in science. A strong record of both giving  and receiving appropriate attribution enhances a  scientist’s standing among peers, and it is a pathway  to career advancement, funding and collaboration  opportunities. If this incentive is removed, science  as a profession will be transformed.

81
<<<END_PAGE_85>>>

<<<PAGE_86>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

PULSE OF SCIENCE QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

82 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Looking into the future, this trajectory seems  unsustainable without a change to how AI platforms  digest scientific creativity and the ways in which  science produces knowledge. A legal proposal is  to establish a duty of AI developers to generate  algorithms capable of tracing scientific sources.  Attribution and integrity functionalities must be  developed or activated. Use of scientific sources to  train LLMs must be made conditional upon the LLM’s  capacity for attribution. Note that the basis for this  duty is not to respect copyright (which is disputed  and currently litigated), but to ensure credit for  authorship and respect the moral rights of creators.

Second, we come to AI users, who also have moral  rights whose forms are not yet obvious. AI has already  impacted how human creativity is understood,  and the act of using AI to generate an output is in  itself creative. But to what extent do AI users create  content if the creative process is partly outsourced to  AI? While a complete assessment of AI’s impact on  scientific and technical creativity may be necessary,  we know that we are just at the beginning of this  trajectory. LLMs are a first-generation technology,  with AI anticipated to move to symbolic AI and  neuro-inspired AI, probably triggering new forms  of human creativity.

Anticipating these new forms requires making them  legally visible so that the moral rights of authors are  recognised. As we enter an age of AI-embedded  creativity, two aspects of human creativity become  more relevant in analysing the moral rights of  creators. The first relates to authorship and the power  of the prompt; the second to potential novel ways to  construct (build, assemble and present) scholarship.

AI outputs depend not only on the AI model  deployed but also on the human input interrogating  the model. Prompts are undoubtedly critical to  activating the creative tasks that generate novel  outputs using LLMs. However, prompts in the  AI‑sphere require new forms of “intellectual labour”  to be effective. The problem is well explored by  Sebastian Porsdam Mann and colleagues1:

Although the use of an LLM should not  fundamentally change the criteria for what  constitutes a substantial contribution, we argue  that it introduces new forms of intellectual  labour, such as prompt engineering, knowledge  embeddings, model fine-tuning, and data and  output curation, that need to be evaluated alongside  more traditional forms of contribution.

The anticipatory challenge is recognising these   new forms of intellectual labour in a way that entitles  creators to claim authorship.

The power of prompts can also be used to craft  scientific outputs tailored to the user. Publications  can be made available by an AI platform in a way  that can be customised to the reader’s preferences  and expertise. Stephen Witt, author of The  Thinking Machine,2 suggests that the future of  the (non‑fiction) book may evolve into “something  more like a knowledge database” that a reader can  choose to retrieve in different formats by prompt.  This could also apply to forms of scholarship other  than books. In this scenario, the author has the power  to assemble scholarship as a knowledge database  creatively. Here, too, the issue of recognition of this  “intellectual labour” must be anticipated.
<<<END_PAGE_86>>>

<<<PAGE_87>>>
These new and potentially empowering possibilities  come with downsides. Such gains in creativity  might come at the price of disengagement and  dissatisfaction with the use of a tool that may hide  some of the intellectual labour that goes into its  workings. AI also creates the risk of rewarding or  empowering only a particular kind of creativity. While  the training materials for LLMs are a vast and complex  ecosystem of text and increasing multimodal data  sourced from across the internet, books, academic  publications and other digital repositories, biases  remain. An obvious example is the preference for  AI inputs in English. Heavy reliance on English data  (more than 90 per cent of the training tokens of GPT- 3 are English) can lead to an “English-centrism” in  AI models, thus supporting or “rewarding” English- speaking creators. This raises human-rights issues  of equal participation and access in the development  of AI. From an anticipation perspective, privileging  English in AI development may result in a narrower  appreciation of expertise and knowledge. Cultivating  diverse viewpoints seems to be a preferable path to  address the growing complexity of the world.

Disempowerment may also result from AI  substituting or replacing existing forms of creativity.  This is already evident with AI tools that generate  images, logos, stories and so on. This has the effect  of devaluing forms of creativity valued in the past but  susceptible to being supplanted by AI. The concept  of cultural heritage can help preserve creators’  human rights. One exciting avenue for tackling these  problems lies in blockchain technologies, which can  act as a tamper-proof record of ownership for digital  assets. As Sarah Kenderdine wrote in the 2022 GESDA  Science Breakthrough Radar:

Distributed digital ledger tokens (DLTs) and  non‑fungible tokens (NFTs), in particular, have  emerged as a way to assert rights over digital art  and culture. These technologies could open the  door to new, more inclusive models of ownership,  in which the rights and control of creative artefacts  can be shared among many people simultaneously,  or entire communities. Smart contracts embedded  in the blockchain could encode how these digital  assets can be used and by whom.

Human creativity is at the core of scientific progress.  AI tools have already cracked some of the basic  operations of knowledge production in science.  While the genie is out of the bottle, the path to the  future can yet be written in a way that aligns with  the moral rights of scientific authors and AI users.  The development of more powerful, better‑trained  AI tools can yield benefits for society. However, the  moral and material rights of creators, and everyone’s  right to scientific and technological advancements,  must be integrated and aligned. To anticipate means  to examine how this technology should evolve, as  well as how human (particularly scientific) creativity  can be reimagined. There is an opportunity to  develop a clearer and more cohesive understanding  of human‑rights standards for innovation. It is time  to form a new “Pact for Science” to fully recognise  the promise of AI and align it with the recognition  of human creativity and dignity.

83
<<<END_PAGE_87>>>

<<<PAGE_88>>>
PULSE OF DIPLOMACY QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

PULSE OF DIPLOMACY QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

84 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS

Harnessing quantum for all

1.2	 Quantum Computing

The Open Quantum Institute is accelerating  the development of applications of quantum  computing for the Sustainable Development  Goals.

How can academics, industry leaders and  policy-makers collaborate best to build  capacity globally, leveraging the 2025 UN Year  of Quantum Science and Technology, and to  activate a market for quantum-computing  applications for the benefit of humanity?

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-PD-1-1

PARTICIPANTS

Moderated by:

Opening remarks:

With:

Closing remarks:

Enrica Porcari

Head of Information Technology Department   at CERN

Sandro Giuliani

Senior Advisor, GESDA

Graham Alabaster

Chief Geneva Office of UN-Habitat

Anousheh Ansari

CEO of XPRIZE

Mourad Beji

Chief Software Officer of the quantum-computing  company Pasqal

Lidia Brito

Assistant Director-General for Natural Sciences   at UNESCO

Anna Fontcuberta i Morral

Incoming President of EPFL, the Swiss Federal  Institute of Technology in Lausanne

Fabiola Gianotti

Director-General of CERN

TAKEAWAY MESSAGES

“Quantum computing can help  access to basic services in the  Global South.”

“Private companies benefit from  collaborating to solve societal  problems.”

“Bridging skills and knowledge  gaps in quantum computing  across the world is a priority.”
<<<END_PAGE_88>>>

<<<PAGE_89>>>
TAKEAWAY MESSAGES

85
<<<END_PAGE_89>>>

<<<PAGE_90>>>
ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI PULSE OF IMPACT

PULSE OF IMPACT

86 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Media-innovation analysis

Artificial Intelligence and Robotics and  Embodied Intelligence are driving innovation  and public discourse, whereas the scientific  advancements in Quantum Computing  and Collective Intelligence are not receiving  corresponding coverage.

LEGEND:

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/1-impact

YoY PATENT GROWTH  YoY growth of topic mentions  from May 2023-April 2024 to  May 2024-April 2025

YoY MEDIA GROWTH  YoY growth of granted topic  patents from May 2023-April  2024 to May 2024-April 2025.

LOW HIGH

YoY PATENT GROWTH2

1.3 Unconventional Computing

LOW YoY MEDIA GROWTH1

1.2 Quantum Computing

1.5 Extended Reality

MEDIA-INNOVATION MATRIX

1.6 Collective Intelligence

1.4 Robotics and  Embodied Intelligence

1.1 Artificial  Intelligence

HIGH
<<<END_PAGE_90>>>

<<<PAGE_91>>>
CUMULATIVE INVESTMENT IN QUANTUM-COMPUTING COMPANIES

120000

CUMULATIVE INVESTMENT (MILLIONS USD)

100000

80000

60000

40000

20000

0

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

NUMBER OF NEW INVESTMENTS IN QUANTUM-COMPUTING COMPANIES

450

NUMBER OF INVESTMENTS

350

250

150

50

0

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

NUMBER OF NEWLY FOUNDED QUANTUM-COMPUTING COMPANIES

160

NUMBER OF NEWLY FOUNDED COMPANIES

120

80

40

0

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

IMPACT FOCUS:

1.2 Investment and  company creation in  Quantum Computing

Investments in quantum-computing companies  took off in 2011, one year after the publication in  the scientific journal Nature of a first “quantum  machine” capable of using quantum physics to  control a mechanical object. This achievement —  awarded “breakthrough of the year” by the American  Association for the Advancement of Science —  initiated a series of fundamental developments  which have demonstrated the practical usability of  quantum computing. After a surge of new companies  created in 2017, the rate of company creation has  remained steady since. The value of investments in  these companies has kept growing, with no sign of  the 2020 pandemic- and economic-related slowdown  in investment observed in other sectors.

Source, facing page: Deep View analysis from 1 May 2022 to  20 April 2024; (1) YoY media growth = YoY growth of topic  mentions from May 2022/April 2023 to May 2023/April 2024;  (2) YoY patent growth = YoY growth of granted topic patents  from May 2022/April 2023 to May 2023/April 2024.

Source, this page: Pitchbook  *Data on newly founded companies in 2023 is incomplete and  will be updated once first funding is raised. Projections indicate  similar levels of company creation to 2021.

87
<<<END_PAGE_91>>>

<<<PAGE_92>>>
QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI PULSE OF SOCIETY

QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI PULSE OF SOCIETY

88 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

What do people say?

An analysis of mainstream media articles,  blog posts and scientific articles over a period  of 12 months shows that breakthroughs in  Artificial Intelligence continue to dominate  discussions in the domain of Quantum  Revolution & Advanced AI. However, this  year also sees an increase in the number of  articles with reference to the AI-related topic  of Robotics and Embodied Intelligence. While  global optimism around Quantum Revolution  & Advanced AI remains strong, this year’s  discourse is also shaped by rising concerns  over security, ethics and uneven regional  engagement.

MAINSTREAM MEDIA SENTIMENT

Positive          Neutral          Negative

MAINSTREAM MEDIA 1 May 2024 - 30 April 2025

UNIQUE ARTICLES 867k 6k 95% 20%

VISUALISED ARTICLES

NET SENTIMENT

ARTICLE UNIQUENESS

1 May 2024 - 30 April 2025 SOCIAL MEDIA

NUMBER OF POSTS

VISUALISED POSTS

NET SENTIMENT

UNIQUE IMPRESSIONS

83% 15%

11,338k 9.5k 58% 850b

Quantum  Computing

Silicon  Photonics

NASA, Future Robotics,  Automation news

Investor Interest

Collective Intelligence

Human surgical  devices

Unconventional  Computing

Investor  fraud

Surgery Legal  Generative

War based applications

Google  Cloud

Student  Advancements AI  Revolution

Virtual  Reality  Headsets

Augmented  Reality

Advanced AI

Universal  Robotics  Evolution

Warehouse  Automation

Chinese  Quantum  Evolution

API breaches

Samsung  Electronics

Autonomous  Driving

Robotics and  Embodied  Intelligence

Ukrainian Robotic  Evolution

AI Innovation AWS  Generative AI

AI Services

Semiconductor  Chip Foundry
<<<END_PAGE_92>>>

<<<PAGE_93>>>
DEMOGRAPHICS & SENTIMENT PER REGION

North America

North America 58% 20% 22%

+ Development

+ Speed

+ Efficiency

GLOBAL SENTIMENT

•	Across regions, the sentiment towards Quantum Revolution & Advanced AI  continues to be largely positive, especially with emerging breakthroughs  in quantum computing, humanoid robotics and silicon photonics. These  technologies are increasingly viewed as enablers of innovation across industries  such as finance, healthcare and communications.

•	Growing concerns centre around ethical, geopolitical and cybersecurity  risks — particularly related to AI-powered security systems and quantum threats  to encryption — indicating a more cautious narrative emerging alongside  optimism.

- Ethical issues

- Losing jobs

- Difficult

Latin America

41% 50% 9% 64% 20% 16%

+ Innovation

+ Robot

+ Opportunity

- Challenge

- Difficult

- Threat

Europe

17% 58% 25%

+ Develop robot

+ Efficiency

+ Leader

Africa

+ Tailored solution

+ Market potential

+ Automate research

- Cybersecurity

- Losing jobs

- Risk

- Not work

- Challenge

- Cyber attack

•	Distribution of discourse varies by region: In the Americas, 95% of posts originate  from the US and 5% from Canada. In Europe, the UK leads with 82%, followed by  Ireland (7.7%).

•	In MENA, Jordan dominates with 65% of posts, while in Asia, it is India with 14%.  In Africa, South Africa leads at 58%, and in Oceania, Australia accounts for  62% of the conversation, with New Zealand rising to 28%.

Source: Deep View social media analysis from 1 May 2024 to 30 April 2025. Note: English-language social

media postings; reposts were excluded from the analysis.

MENA

64% 25% 12%

+ Smarter future

+ Economic pot.

+ Innovation

- Serious threat

- Difficult

- Expensive

Russia & Asia

62% 23% 15%

+ Local innovation

- Ethical issues

+ Efficiency

- Data security

+ Cutting-edge

- Risk

Oceania

77%

13% 10%

+ Market potential

- Difficult

+ Tailored solution

- Catastrophic risks

+ Automate

- Cybersecurity

89
<<<END_PAGE_93>>>

<<<PAGE_94>>>
PULSE OF SOCIETY ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF SOCIETY

PULSE OF SOCIETY ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF SOCIETY QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

QUANTUM REVOLUTION & ADVANCED AI

90

Media analysis

KEY TAKEAWAYS    Artificial Intelligence discussions have increased  by 31.9%, with a significant focus on the Future of  generative AI, which grew by 38.5%. AI foundations  also saw a modest increase of 7.0%. However,  World‑modelling and embodied AI experienced  a decline of 7.3%, indicating a shift in focus within  the realm of AI. Quantum Computing saw a slower  overall growth at +4.6%, with quantum Hardware  development declining by 11.5%.

There is a highly positive sentiment around Quantum  Revolution & Advanced AI discussions, with an extremely  positive overall sentiment of 83% in news and blogs, and  60% in social-media posts. This enthusiasm is clearly  driven by the current hype around Artificial Intelligence  and Robotics and Embodied Intelligence. AI's potential  to revolutionise all sectors and major parts of people’s  lives fuels this optimism. Additionally, Collective  Intelligence focusing on Human‑computer interaction  further contributes to the excitement.

However, the discussion also acknowledges the obvious  risks of these disruptive technologies. Concerns about  AI not aligning with ethical values and security  concerns regarding the incorporation of quantum  computing are part of the broader discourse. While  these issues are being discussed, they do not receive  as much extensive coverage.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/1-society

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM

MAINSTREAM MEDIA GROWTH

MAINSTREAM MEDIA DOMINANCE

SOCIAL  MEDIA SENTIMENT

Quantum Revolution  & Advanced AI

-28%  Quantum Revolution & Advanced AI

UNIQUE ARTICLES

867

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

59% 32%

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

60% 24%

EMERGING  TOPICS

1.1 Artificial Intelligence

-7%  World-modelling and embodied AI

38%  Future of generative AI

32%  Artificial Intelligence

35%  AI for science

7%  AI foundations

1

3

4

2

DOMINANCE

3 4

2

433k

1

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

SENTIMENT - 2023-24 58% 30%

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

64% 24%
<<<END_PAGE_94>>>

<<<PAGE_95>>>
1.3 Unconventional  Computing 1.2 Quantum Computing

57%  Quantum error correction and noise mitigation

8%  Near-term quantum computing

24%  Organoid intelligence

-5%  Unconventional Computing

5%  Neuromorphic computing

-12%  Hardware development

23%  Algorithm design

5%  Quantum Computing

-8%  Optical computing -4%  Cellular computing

3

2

2

4

1 3 4

1

DOMINANCE DOMINANCE DOMINANCE DOMINANCE DOMINANCE

1 2

4

7k

3 4 125k

43k 1

3

2

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

30% 59%

67% 27%

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

60% 19%

63% 27%

1.6 Collective Intelligence

1.5 Extended Reality

1.4 Robotics &  Embodied Intelligence

268%  Human-AI interaction 42%  XR interfaces

58%  Human-robot interaction

16%  Haptics and multisensory interfaces

7%  Robotics and Embodied Intelligence

-3%  Human-computer interaction

4%  Large-scale collaboration

0%  Collective Intelligence

-35%  Spatial computing

-12%  Collective cognition

-21%  Extended Reality

6%  Robotic hardware 5%  Robotic software

1%  Smarter teams

-8%  Data

3

4

2

4

1 2

3

1 2 3 4

1

1

3 4

4

4

1

3

219k

41k

3

1 2

2

2

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

52% 35%

63% 33%

67% 25%

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

55% 25%

58% 36%

77% 18%

69% 12%

91
<<<END_PAGE_95>>>

<<<PAGE_96>>>
PLATFORM INTRODUCTION HUMAN AUGMENTATION PLATFORM INTRODUCTION HUMAN AUGMENTATION

92 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM

2

Human  Augmentation

A growing proficiency in manipulating human  biology has opened the door to a range of new  possibilities. From enhancing the capabilities of the  human brain to extending healthspan, improving  sleep, fighting disease and engineering our cells —  and our fundamental genetics — there are now  countless frontiers on which we are changing  and augmenting the experience of being human.  Even our consciousness is now open to alteration.  Here we explore the science and opportunities  that research in Human Augmentation is creating,  anticipating future breakthroughs that could be  transformational for our species.
<<<END_PAGE_96>>>

<<<PAGE_97>>>
DEEP DIVE (pages 94–105)  Augmenting sleep to slow down biological ageing

PULSE OF SCIENCE (pages 106–145)

Containing deep insights into anticipated advances  associated with Human Augmentation over  the next 5, 10 and 25 years, the GESDA Pulse of  Science reports the opinions of leading researchers  working in the fields of cognitive enhancement,  cell and gene engineering, healthspan extension,  consciousness research, engineering human  biology and future therapeutics.

PULSE OF DIPLOMACY (pages 146–147)

The GESDA Pulse of Diplomacy captures the latest  discussions between diplomats and scientists  at the 2024 Geneva Science and Diplomacy  Anticipation Summit on the topic of cognitive  enhancement, including the use and deployment  of brain‑machine interfaces and their possible  impact upon society.

PULSE OF IMPACT (pages 148–149)

Investment trends and dynamics of company  creation highlight cognitive enhancement as an  increasingly significant topic. The GESDA Pulse  of Impact provides data detailing private‑sector  investment, intellectual‑property activity and  company creation in this area since 2000.

PULSE OF SOCIETY (pages 150–153)

Powered by AI, the GESDA Pulse of Society’s  network and dynamic sentiment analysis of both  mainstream and social media reveals macro- and  micro-trends in public opinion around the world  on topics relating to Human Augmentation.

93
<<<END_PAGE_97>>>

<<<PAGE_98>>>
ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING DEEP DIVE  HUMAN AUGMENTATION

94

DEEP DIVE:

Augmenting sleep to  slow down biological ageing

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-DD-1

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Nici Wenderoth

Professor for Neural Control of Movement at ETH  Zurich — the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology  Zurich — and Future Health Technology Programme  Director at Singapore-ETH Centre

Caroline Lustenberger

Group Leader in the Neural Control of Movement Lab  at ETH Zurich

Brian Kennedy

Distinguished Professor in the department of  biochemistry and physiology at the Yong Loo Lin  School of Medicine, National University of Singapore

Vincenzo Sorrentino

Assistant Professor at the Yong Loo Lin School  of Medicine, National University of Singapore

CONTRIBUTORS:

Evelyne Bischof, Michael Chee, Dario Dornbierer,

Brian Earp, Collin Ewald, Rolf Fronczek, Jan Gruber, Jackie Han,

Christine Yuan Huang, Stephanie Huwiler, Manu Kapur,

Jonathan Kipnis, Martha Merrow, Satchidananda Panda,

Gina Poe, Evan Shaulson, Tzipi Strauss, Tan Eng Chye, Hiroki Ueda,

Effy Vayena, Vladyslav Vyazovskiy, Christian Wolfrum
<<<END_PAGE_98>>>

<<<PAGE_99>>>
Ageing is a complex and time-dependent  decline in physiological function that drives both  morbidity and mortality. Until recently, medical  science treated it as an inevitable and largely  untreatable process, but this view is increasingly  being challenged. The field of longevity science is  uncovering the underlying mechanisms that drive  ageing and developing interventions that can slow  down or even partially reverse them. Rather than  focusing solely on treating diseases associated with  ageing, the goal is to delay or prevent their onset  and extend the number of years that people spend  in good health.

A healthy diet, regular exercise and good sleep  are frequently touted as the foundations of a long  and healthy life. But while there is now extensive  scientific evidence for the effects of the first  two practices, few studies have investigated the  connections between sleep and longevity. That is  striking, because sleep is the body’s natural process  for restoration and repair. We intuitively know that  a good night’s sleep makes us feel better — yet  modern life is constantly pushing us to reduce the  third of our lives that it takes up, and what sleep we  get may be of variable quality.

The price of such attrition is significant. It is already  well established that poor sleep in humans is  associated with a shorter lifespan caused by a  plethora of health conditions such as cardiovascular  disease, diabetes and dementia as well as higher all- cause mortality risk. And thanks to our increasingly  sophisticated understanding of sleep’s effects, there  are opportunities to augment it to protect or even  improve health. These include behaviour change,  environmental modification, pharmacology and  neurotechnology.

Yet fundamental questions remain to be answered  about the interface between sleep and ageing:

•	 What counts as “good sleep”, and does   it vary from person to person?

•	 Does poor sleep cause ageing, or does ageing  cause poor sleep — or both?

•	 How can we accurately measure both sleep   and ageing at scale?

•	 Can we use science and technology to optimise  the effectiveness of sleep?

Answering these questions could unlock a powerful  new tool for public health. While medical advances  have led to significant increases in global life  expectancy, the number of years that people spend  in ill health at the end of their lives has remained  stubbornly constant. Demographically speaking,  therefore, most societies are ageing rapidly, with  increasing numbers of older people becoming  medically intensive, socially dependent and  economically unproductive. Addressing the impacts  of this demographic change is becoming a priority  for policy-makers. Sleep augmentation could be one  vital tool in closing the gap between lifespan and  “healthspan”.

First, though, sleep and longevity researchers  must elaborate the evidence of the links between  their fields. Tools for diagnosing and treating sleep  problems need to be made more scalable. And  scientists, ethicists, policy-makers and civil society  need to come together to consider the ethical  implications of augmenting sleep, including the  implications of uneven access to good sleep and the  possibility of coercive measures to enforce sleep.

95 95
<<<END_PAGE_99>>>

<<<PAGE_100>>>
DEEP DIVE  HUMAN AUGMENTATION

DEEP DIVE  HUMAN AUGMENTATION

96 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

KEY OPPORTUNITIES

Define “good” sleep

Despite decades of research and growing  understanding of the processes that underlie sleep,  the field has struggled to agree the hallmarks of  good sleep. This is partly because sleep is a complex  and multifaceted phenomenon driven by both  biological and psychosocial imperatives. People also  have varied sleep requirements and sleep styles,  influenced by both genetic and socio‑cultural factors.  Nonetheless, establishing what good sleep looks  like for different groups of people will be a crucial  first step in developing ways to augment sleep for  healthspan extension.

Link sleep and ageing

While it is clear that sleep and health are related  (for instance, the established correlation of sleep  and longevity), the interaction with the underlying  processes of ageing is not well understood. Poor  sleep has been associated with many age-related  diseases, suggesting it plays a broader systemic  role. But elaborating the objective and quantitative  evidence of this connection will be crucial in  convincing healthcare providers, pharmaceutical  companies and policy-makers that augmenting  sleep could boost healthspan.

Longevity researchers have identified various  biomarkers that indicate a patient’s “biological age”  (as distinct from their chronological age), which  could play a crucial role in determining the impact   of different sleep interventions on longevity.

Prioritise good sleeping

It is estimated that a third of adults in high-income  countries do not get enough sleep. While the causes  are varied, many of the biggest contributors relate to  lifestyle choices and environmental factors. Consider  that the simple need for an alarm clock, for example,  is itself evidence of impaired sleep.

This suggests that significant gains can be made  through interventions that encourage better sleep  habits, such as creating more sleep-friendly cities  (for example, by reducing light and noise pollution),  decreasing the adverse impacts of indoor lighting on  circadian rhythms and adjusting work and education  schedules to promote better sleep. This speaks to the  emerging principle of sleep as a universal human  right — which highlights the problematic lack of  data on sleep habits in lower-income countries. It  is likely that sleep deficiencies are also prevalent in  these societies, but they may have different causes  and effects.

Engineer better sleep

We may also be able to intervene to improve sleep  more directly, initially in the treatment of people   who suffer from established sleep disorders.  Advances in neurotechnology, pharmacology and  “digital therapeutics” could dramatically improve  their diagnosis and management, potentially  facilitating personalised and more effective  treatments. But as our understanding improves it  may become possible to enhance sleep. Rather than  simply being restorative, enhanced sleep could boost  mental performance and turbocharge the body’s  regenerative capacities. Alternatively, it might convey  the same health benefits in a shorter amount of  time, reducing the amount of time people need to  spend in bed. However, such developments would  introduce thorny ethical questions around unequal  access and competitive advantage that will require  careful consideration.
<<<END_PAGE_100>>>

<<<PAGE_101>>>
97
<<<END_PAGE_101>>>

<<<PAGE_102>>>
DEEP DIVE  HUMAN AUGMENTATION

DEEP DIVE  HUMAN AUGMENTATION

98 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Sleep and health

Modern sleep research began with the discovery  of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep in 1953.1 Prior  to this, sleep had been thought of as a largely  passive state, but the REM breakthrough led to the  realisation that our brains cycle between different  stages of sleep, each characterised by a distinct  pattern of neuronal activity. This era also saw  significant advances in our understanding of the  body’s circadian clock, which regulates the timing  of our sleep-wake cycles.2

Today, our understanding of sleep is considerably  more sophisticated. Rather than proceeding in a  series of orderly stages, sleep is now understood to  be a multidimensional phenomenon that unfolds  over a spectrum of states between consciousness  and unconsciousness. And while sleep research has  traditionally focused on the brain, there is growing  recognition that sleep influences a raft of important  biological systems, including metabolism, DNA  repair and the gut microbiome.3

The links between sleep and health are well  established. Sleep plays a crucial role in memory  formation, brain plasticity, the clearance of waste  products from the brain, the function of the immune  system and cardiovascular health. In the short term,  sleep deprivation impairs cognitive performance  and can lead to various mental-health problems,  while in the long term it is associated with increased  incidence of cardiovascular disease, diabetes, weight  gain, dementia and certain cancers.4,5 Lack of sleep  has consistently been linked with higher risk of   all-cause mortality.6

Unfortunately, sleep deprivation is endemic in much  of the world. Up to a third of US adults, for example,  do not get sufficient sleep.7 Often this is the result of  a mismatch between socially enforced schedules for  sleeping and waking, and the patterns established  by circadian clocks. These circadian “chronotypes”  depend on age, genetics and the lighting  environment, and can differ significantly from person  to person,8 but such individual variation is seldom  properly accommodated by the requirements of  modern life and work. The resulting deprivation has  been termed “social jetlag” — the effects arising from  lack of sleep of the necessary quality and duration.

There is growing recognition that improving sleep  quality could have enormous health benefits,   but acting on this raises numerous challenges.  For a start, the field has struggled to coalesce on  a universal definition of “good sleep”.9 While there  is general consensus that it is detrimental to take  a long time to fall asleep, or to have fragmented  or highly disrupted sleep, it is less clear what  constitutes the optimal composition of sleep.  The ideal duration and distribution of specific  sleep stages, as well as the quantity and quality  of underlying brain wave oscillations during these  stages, remains insufficiently understood. A lack  of strong theories of sleep limits most studies to  drawing correlations between sleep and health  rather than establishing causal relationships.   And recommendations are often biased towards  Western sleep patterns despite well-known regional  and cultural variations.10

Robust data provides the foundation for biomedical  research but is lacking when it comes to sleep. Part  of the problem is that much of the data used by  researchers is derived from participant self‑reports,  which can lead to significant overestimates of  sleep duration and thus to disagreements with  objective data collected during sleep studies,  particularly around the health impacts of longer  sleep durations.11,12 Sharing objective sleep data  between groups has proven challenging due to  a lack of common formats, ethical considerations  around sensitive health information and the sheer  quantities of raw data recorded during sleep studies.  Wearable technologies like smart watches could  help collect more objective data “in the wild”, but  they capture a more limited suite of sleep metrics  than gold‑standard approaches, such as monitoring  patients overnight in a laboratory and collecting data  on brain activity, eye movement, muscle activity,  heart rate and breathing.

The complex and multifaceted nature of sleep  means that achieving truly universal definitions and  recommendations for good sleep may ultimately  be impossible. But it should be possible to reach a  broad working consensus in key areas, and given the  well-established links between sleep and disease,  and the widespread prevalence of bad sleep, there  is considerable scope for sleep interventions to  drastically improve health at both the individual   and societal levels.
<<<END_PAGE_102>>>

<<<PAGE_103>>>
5 YEARS

The development of standardised formats for sleep  data, and a common platform for sharing it, allows  the large-scale analysis of sleep data from both  animals and humans. Massive datasets enable  studies of sleep’s relationship to various health  parameters that were previously infeasible.

Breakthroughs in wearable technology enable  continuous monitoring of brain activity and other  key biological signatures, providing new insights into  sleep patterns and their relationship to health. Sleep  researchers work with the technology industry to  agree standards for wearable health monitoring.

Researchers identify biomarkers as part of hallmarks  of sleep that can reliably determine someone’s  chronotype rather than having to rely on self- reported or observational measures.

10 YEARS

Sleep researchers identify the key parameters  required for sleep that is optimal for good health,  thus establishing a widely accepted definition   of “good sleep”.

Development of strong theories of sleep give rise  to new hypotheses about its connections to health,  helping to guide more effective data collection.

Establishment of well-defined “somnotypes”, which  describe the combination of a patient’s chronotype,  sleep timing, sleep duration and sleep structure.

A better understanding of the molecular and  behavioural processes that govern how people’s  circadian rhythms synchronise with their  environment.

25 YEARS

Sleep is designated as a human right due to growing  appreciation of its role in health. Promoting better  sleep becomes an integral part of the policy-making  process in all areas of governance.

Greater awareness of the benefits of sleep and the  development of a broad suite of sleep interventions  leads to massive improvements in global health.  Rates of drug abuse, mental health issues and  developmental issues plummet.

99
<<<END_PAGE_103>>>

<<<PAGE_104>>>
DEEP DIVE  HUMAN AUGMENTATION

DEEP DIVE  HUMAN AUGMENTATION

100 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Sleep and longevity

The emerging field of longevity medicine seeks  to rewrite our understanding of ageing. Rather  than viewing the process as an inevitable and  immutable part of life, proponents approach  ageing as a treatable condition.

The discipline builds on breakthroughs in the  biology of ageing in the late 20th century. These  identified key mechanisms that drive the process,  including cellular senescence, oxidative stress  and critical intracellular signalling pathways.13 The  discovery of interventions that can target these  processes, such as time-restricted feeding and drugs  like metformin and rapamycin, demonstrated the  theoretical feasibility of slowing ageing. Today, a  growing number of longevity clinics offer a wide  range of interventions designed to boost healthspan,  including nutrition plans, supplements, hormone  therapies and even stem-cell treatments.

Sleep has remained comparatively understudied  during this evolution, despite being considered  one of the hallmarks of healthy ageing. This is to  the detriment of both fields — denying longevity  medicine a potentially powerful avenue for  intervention and sleep researchers a new lens for  understanding sleep’s impact on health. Elucidating  the connections between these two disciplines  will be difficult, however, as they both deal with  phenomena that are hard to define and present as   complex assemblages of biomarkers.

It is well established that as people age they tend  to sleep less at night, experiencing more frequent  disturbances14 and changes in the macro- and  micro-structure of sleep, but it is not yet clear  whether this is simply a marker of advancing age,  or if worsening sleep actually contributes to the  ageing process. People whose sleep patterns are  typical of those who are chronologically older than  them are at higher risk of age-related diseases,

providing tentative evidence that age-related sleep  deterioration accelerates ageing, although further  research will be required to establish causality.   And sleep deterioration is often the result of illness   or other unhealthy behaviours such as lack of  exercise or alcohol consumption, making it difficult  to tease out the influence of sleep on ageing.

One promising avenue is to compare patients’  sleep data against readouts from “ageing clocks” —  computational models developed by longevity  researchers that analyse a collection of biomarkers  to measure biological age, independently of  chronological age. This could help establish how  different sleep patterns affect the rates at which  people age. However, several different clocks  have been developed, each focussing on different  collections of biomarkers, including clinical metrics,  gene expression, epigenetic changes, protein levels,  metabolism, immune function and even facial  features.15,16 There is often little overlap between  their predictions, and many suffer from low  reproducibility, raising concerns about how reliably  they actually reflect biological age. There are also   a growing number of organ-specific ageing clocks,  designed to predict the onset of specific diseases.17  As such, studies measuring the impact of sleep  on ageing need to test against a broad panel of  different clocks.

Deciding which sleep metrics to use also presents  challenges. The gold standard for sleep research  is polysomnography, which involves monitoring  patients overnight in a laboratory and collecting  data on brain activity, eye movement, muscle  activity, heart rate and breathing. Novel avenues for  measuring autonomic nervous system activity and  arousal, such as pupil monitoring, are emerging,  providing simpler ways to collect sleep data.18   But most such studies remain expensive and  time-consuming, making it hard to collect enough  data to draw meaningful statistical conclusions in  comparative studies. There are also concerns that  contrived laboratory conditions result in unnatural  sleep and thus unrepresentative data.

Wearable technologies present an opportunity  to collect sleep data at greater scale and in more  natural settings. But it’s unclear if the metrics  collected by smart watches and smart rings —  typically including movement, heart rate and oxygen  saturation — provide sufficient resolution to capture  a true picture of sleep patterns.19 A significant  problem is the fact that sleep has traditionally been  defined by changes in brain activity, which wearables  do not measure directly. Differences in dynamics  and timescales make it hard to draw correlations  between these different metrics, and making  progress may require new definitions of sleep that  are less brain-centric. New approaches may again  help: for example, wireless brain-monitoring devices  show promise as a way to provide accurate sleep  data in more natural settings.20

There is also a wealth of animal data in both sleep  and longevity research that could be used to tease  out linkages between some of the fundamental  molecular mechanisms underlying both processes.  However, caution is needed because it is not clear  how easily findings can be translated to human  contexts. For instance, mice are a popular model  organism, but their sleep durations normally  increase as they get older — the reverse of the   typical human pattern.

Despite these challenges, the sheer quantity of sleep  data that has already been collected by researchers  presents an opportunity in itself. Creating a common  data platform where sleep researchers can share  their results could enable studies on a scale far  beyond the resources of any individual group.  Efforts are under way to create such platforms, but  it will take considerable work to establish common  formats for data and to deal with the ethical and  regulatory challenges of sharing it, as well as how to  support, maintain and update these platforms on a  sustainable basis.
<<<END_PAGE_104>>>

<<<PAGE_105>>>
55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100

5 YEARS

Better understanding of the bidirectional links  between sleep and age make it possible for longevity  researchers to use sleep patterns to assess a patient’s  biological age.

More powerful non-linear computational  approaches enable the development of increasingly  sophisticated ageing clocks that capture  ever‑greater collections of biomarkers.

Wearable technology combined with AI provides  personalised longevity monitoring and predictions  about health trajectories.

10 YEARS

Reliable, compact, wireless brain-monitoring devices  go mainstream, enabling continuous monitoring of  a host of brain-health metrics relevant to longevity  and sleep.

Highly sophisticated ageing clocks provide reliable  predictions of health and longevity up to 20 years  into the future that can guide patient decisions.  This also makes it possible to do smaller clinical  trials by targeting patients with particular ageing  characteristics.

Longevity medicine establishes systematic ways to  account for the “exposome” — the environmental  factors impacting health — when studying longevity.

25 YEARS

Development of “digital twins” of real humans makes  it possible to carry out virtual interventional studies  that greatly improve our understanding of the links  between sleep and longevity.

AI enables the monitoring of ageing processes in real  time based on continuous measurement of genetic,  molecular, behavioural and environmental data.

101
<<<END_PAGE_105>>>

<<<PAGE_106>>>
DEEP DIVE  HUMAN AUGMENTATION

DEEP DIVE  HUMAN AUGMENTATION

102 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Augmenting sleep

As the connections between sleep and ageing  are established, they will create avenues for  augmenting sleep to improve healthspan. These  include social interventions that modify behaviour  or the environment to promote better sleep, as well  as new drugs and neurotechnologies that may be  able to improve sleep at the individual level.

Our internal clocks synchronise with natural cycles of  light and dark, but both our environments and our  habits can disrupt them, leading to poor sleep. We  increasingly spend our lives indoors, staying up past  sunset, thanks to artificial lighting — meaning that  most people are not exposed to natural patterns of  daylight. In addition, modern life and work schedules  rarely accommodate the demands of our individual  chronotypes, leading to a mismatch between our  biological clocks and the socially imposed timing of  our daily activities. This problem is particularly acute  for the one in four people globally who are engaged  in shift work, and for adolescents, who have a natural  tendency to wake later in the day.

So at the grandest scale, efforts to re-engineer  modern life could improve the sleep of millions.  Increasing flexibility in work and school schedules, for  example, could dramatically reduce the prevalence  of “social jet lag” — the difference between the way  our bodies feel, in terms of energy and preparedness  to engage in life’s activities, and the times we are  actually required to be active. But this raises social,  cultural and technological challenges.

It may be difficult to persuade people and  policy‑makers that such change is necessary, despite  the disruption it poses to conventional patterns  of work and life. Neglecting sleep in the name  of productivity has long been valorised in many  societies, and a concerted effort is required to shift  these attitudes. The connection between lack of  sleep and accidents is well established, and has led  to changes in working practices, but the positive  case for the benefits of good sleep has not been  made so effectively. Studies that connect better  sleep to measures like GDP, productivity or reduced  healthcare expenditure could prove invaluable  for encouraging governments and insurers to  fund programmes21 and social changes aimed at  improving the population’s sleep quality.

However, getting better sleep is not an option for  everyone. Economic deprivation can force people to  work long hours or multiple jobs, or to live in noisy  or uncomfortable settings that are not conducive  to good sleep. Lack of understanding about the  deep importance of sleep and the nature of optimal  sleep behaviours in the general population can also  prevent people from adopting better habits. More  broadly, getting people to change their behaviour  to improve their health is notoriously challenging.22  Providing people with personalised sleep coaching  might help, but providing broad access is a  challenge. One promising model comes from Japan,  where employers pay for their staff to undergo  mandatory annual health check-ups: these will soon  include a sleep check-up. Combining sleep data  collected by wearables with interventions delivered  by coaching apps or chatbots could provide a way   to give personalised sleep advice at scale.

There are also a host of more direct, technological  interventions that could help improve sleep in  individuals. Optimising indoor lighting to mimic  both the spectral characteristics and timing of  natural daylight might dramatically improve sleep  for large numbers of people. Replicating natural light  cycles in a neonatal intensive care unit in Mexico,  for example, resulted in babies gaining weight  significantly faster, allowing much earlier discharge  and demonstrating the potential health impacts   of circadian-optimised lighting.23

Slow-wave sleep, which is associated with a host  of health benefits, can be enhanced by audio  stimulation, as well as the non-invasive application  of electrical or magnetic fields to the brain.24,25  Biofeedback technologies record and relay key  measures of arousal back to the patient to help  them learn to control unconscious drivers of arousal,  though evidence for their efficacy is mixed.26 Light  therapy that exposes patients to carefully timed  doses of artificial sunlight can help treat a host  of sleep problems.27 And devices that warm the  skin have been shown to deepen sleep in healthy  adults.28,29

Pharmaceutical approaches also hold promise.   Sleep drugs have historically failed to replicate   the full benefits of natural sleep, but there is a  growing body of research into slow-wave-enhancing  drugs, which might have particular applications.   The anaesthetic dexmedetomidine, for example,   is showing promise for treating the sleep  disturbances that reinforce post-traumatic stress  disorder.30 Research is also demonstrating that   slow-wave enhancement can boost the brain’s  waste-clearance system.31
<<<END_PAGE_106>>>

<<<PAGE_107>>>
103
<<<END_PAGE_107>>>

<<<PAGE_108>>>
DEEP DIVE  HUMAN AUGMENTATION

DEEP DIVE  HUMAN AUGMENTATION

104 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

The field of sleep augmentation is still relatively  young and there are likely to be many more  promising avenues for intervention that have  yet to be discovered. However, drug and therapy  developers need to know what aspects of sleep   to target for augmentation and why. This is  challenging in a field as deep and diverse as sleep,  where research is often highly focused on very  specific sleep processes, molecular pathways or   brain regions.

Longevity medicine provides a promising blueprint  for overcoming this problem. In 2013, researchers  published a list of nine “hallmarks of ageing” — key  changes in bodily processes that are indicative of  age-related functional decline.32 While the list was  incomplete, it helped the field to coalesce around  common principles and to focus efforts on the most  promising targets for intervention. Establishing  the “hallmarks of sleep” could help clarify thinking  and allow sleep researchers to study how their  interventions impact these key parameters.

Besides knowledge generation, efforts to augment  sleep to improve healthspan face regulatory and  business challenges. The field must decide whether  and how to frame sleep-promoting interventions  as lifestyle improvements or medical treatments.  Targeting the lifestyle space simplifies regulatory  challenges and provides access to a greater number  of potential beneficiaries, but offers lower margins,  and it may be hard to differentiate properly validated  interventions from pseudoscientific products.  Developing a medical treatment, on the other   hand, is expensive, and getting regulatory   approval is difficult.

Clinical trials typically require concrete endpoints,  such as reduced incidence of a specific disease. An  overall improvement in health and well-being is  harder to accommodate under traditional medical  models. Moreover, extensions of healthspan may not  be evident for decades and are hard to demonstrate,  while the science of ageing clocks remains  unsettled. Without large-scale and long-term  studies of these interventions in decentralised and  diverse populations, it will be hard to truly validate  and understand the impacts they have on health,  ageing and society.

The field also needs to establish whether sleep  interventions should aim merely to restore people  to healthy sleep patterns or to enhance sleep  to levels that are not achievable naturally. This  may be significant not just for clinical reasons  but for encouraging acceptance. Framing sleep  interventions as a way to slow ageing may fail to  appeal to young people, for example: to encourage  uptake in this group, interventions might need to  provide more immediate benefits, such as improved  cognitive or physical performance. GLP-1 weight‑loss  drugs provide an illuminating case study: while  they are associated with a host of long-term health  benefits, their popularity is arguably due to their  immediate perceived cosmetic effects.

In principle, achieving “better sleep” holds the  potential to boost mental and physical performance,  turbocharge the body’s regenerative capacities or  even reduce how much sleep is required to remain  healthy. However, there is little evidence to date  that sleep as a whole can be enhanced, or what  long-term enhancement would look like. Sleep is  characterised by the careful orchestration of many  interacting processes, and over-engineering it holds  the risk of pushing this delicate balance out of  equilibrium. A benefit realised in one area may be  detrimental in another.

Efforts to augment sleep also introduce a host of  thorny ethical challenges. Health is often considered  a human right, so the deep links between health  and sleep imply that sleep, too, should have the  status of a human right. This would impose duties  to ensure equitable access to good sleep, which  raises questions about how to find the resources to  support this. This would also have to be balanced  against the fact that some sleep disruption may  be necessary to support the functioning of our  24/7 society. The prospect of enhanced sleep  also introduces issues of fairness. In many areas,  including competitive sports and exams, the use of  performance-enhancing interventions is considered  cheating. Would the same standard apply to sleep  augmentation?

Sleep augmentation could also introduce new forms  of coercion. If employers discover that better sleep  improves worker performance, or governments find  that it reduces public health expenditure, they might  mandate efforts to monitor and improve sleep.   This would have significant implications for privacy  and autonomy, as mentioned earlier. But then,  we already penalise people for behaviour such as  drinking that impairs performance at work or in  safety-critical situations like driving or operating  heavy machinery. Even moderate sleep deprivation  can impair people as much as alcohol consumption  deemed unsafe for driving.33

Deciding how to tackle these competing priorities  will be challenging, so it is important to consider  them early on in the development of new sleep  interventions, rather than accounting for them  post‑implementation. Anticipating scientific  progress and its implications well in advance  and developing adaptive regulations and ethical  frameworks to govern these emerging capabilities  will be essential.
<<<END_PAGE_108>>>

<<<PAGE_109>>>
85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100

5 YEARS

Regulators adapt clinical trial rules to allow the  assessment and approval of preventative treatments  that boost healthspan rather than tackle specific  diseases.

Cheap and scalable artificial daylight helps to protect  the circadian function of people who spend the bulk  of their time indoors.

Many governments and employers institute regular  sleep check-ups designed to educate people  about healthy sleep habits and provide support.  AI‑powered chatbots provide a scalable way to  provide sleep coaching to millions.

Societal norms start to change in response to  rising awareness of sleep’s centrality to health.  Policy‑makers and businesses start to introduce  more flexibility into scheduling to take account of  the variation in chronotypes. Daylight-saving time   is abolished.

10 YEARS

Stratification of sleep patients into different  somnotypes enables better targeting of sleep  interventions depending on individual sleep  characteristics.

Breakthroughs in longevity medicine and sleep  interventions see the prevalence of some age- related diseases plummet. Better understanding   of sleep’s role in brain health and its waste clearance  system leads to treatments for post-traumatic stress  disorder, Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease,  cerebral amyloid angiopathy, Huntington’s disease  and schizophrenia.

Behavioural-change programmes lead to massive  improvements in global sleep, providing a significant  boost to public health. School times are shifted to  account for the natural shift to later chronotypes  during adolescence.

Digital designers start to build circadian rhythms  into the virtual worlds that people spend increasing  amounts of their time in.

25 YEARS

Breakthroughs in pharmacology and  neurotechnologies enable sleep augmentation.   This makes it possible to sleep for shorter periods  while getting the same health benefits, or induce  lucid dreaming on command so that people can  work, play and learn in their sleep.

Environmental modifications and targeted  interventions make it possible to synchronise  circadian rhythms to social timings, eliminating   the phenomenon of social jet lag.

Biomimetic drugs replicate the underlying  neurobiological processes of sleep, making   it possible to get the benefits of rest by simply   taking a pill.

105
<<<END_PAGE_109>>>

<<<PAGE_110>>>
HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE

106 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

2.1

Cognitive Enhancement

CHAIR:   Jaimie Henderson

John and Jene Blume — Robert and Ruth Halperin  Professor, and Professor of Neurosurgery and,  by courtesy, of Neurology at Stanford University,  California

CONTRIBUTORS:   Marcel van Gerven, Andreas Tolias,  Maryam Shanechi, Kenneth Harris,  Stephanie Lacour, Mu-ming Poo,  Matthew MacDougall, Nataliya Kos’myna

The field of cognitive enhancement is rapidly  accelerating. As research progresses, allowing  greater understanding of how our brains process  information to create experience, memory   and understanding, it creates the potential   for altering human cognitive capabilities.   This could revolutionise medicine and reshape  the definition of human intelligence and the  experience of being human.

AI is already playing a transformative role in the  field. Scientists are leveraging powerful AI models  to analyse huge neural datasets and to create  predictive models that mirror the brain’s own  processes.1 This fundamental understanding is the  bedrock for ambitious goals like building functional  digital twins of specific brain regions,2 which could  dramatically accelerate the development   of therapies.

This synergy is a two-way street: insights into the  brain’s remarkable energy efficiency are inspiring  the development of next-generation, brain-like  “neuromorphic” computer chips, promising to make  powerful AI accessible on small, everyday devices.3

The immediate focus is on developing sophisticated  closed-loop brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) to treat  conditions like depression by reading and actively  regulating brain states in real time.4 This requires  overcoming significant hurdles in materials science  to create biocompatible, flexible electronics that can  integrate safely and effectively with neural tissue.

Eventually, these technologies will extend our  minds — both in cognitive capabilities and in the  physical location of data-logging and processing.  Invasive implants, such as those restoring motor  function, and non-invasive wearables are already  offloading and augmenting cognitive tasks. We are  likely to become ever more reliant on such tools, and  research will make their integration into our lives  ever more seamless.

However impressive the advances, progress  in this area also creates obvious ethical issues  about permission to read from and write to the  brain, ownership of neural data and inequities  emerging in cognitive ability, to name just a few  concerns. Navigating the landscape of data privacy,  technological dependency and the integration of AI  with human consciousness will be as critical as the  scientific breakthroughs themselves.
<<<END_PAGE_110>>>

<<<PAGE_111>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

The convergence of neuroscience, sensing  technology and materials science is paving the way  for unprecedented interventions in understanding,  augmenting and repairing the functions of  the human brain. Efforts to understand the  Fundamentals of cognition are progressing through  a range of technologies that can generate and  analyse huge neural datasets. Researchers are also  making progress in Decrypting the brain, using AI  to understand how neural activity leads to thought,  intention and behaviour. This is allowing the  construction of useful Neuromodulation systems:  precise, targeted interventions, often involving  feedback loops, that can influence attention,  learning, memory and affective states. As a result,  we are moving into an era of Exogenous cognition  that will integrate artificial cognitive systems with  biological brains. Such developments are set to  fundamentally alter human experience.

2.1 	 Cognitive Enhancement

SUB-TOPICS

2.1.1	 Fundamentals of cognition

2.1.2	 Decrypting the brain

2.1.3	 Neuromodulation systems

2.1.4	 Exogenous cognition

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

Major breakthroughs in understanding the  Fundamentals of cognition appear to be a  decade away still, but could significantly impact  developments in other areas of science and  technology — and in society more broadly.  Neuromodulation systems are much more  mature and are already being deployed, reducing  the Anticipation Potential scores of this sub‑topic.  In contrast, we are far from fully Decrypting the  brain, and together with Exogenous cognition,  this is an area where developments are more  uncertain, with no major breakthroughs expected  for 12 to 15 years.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/cog-en

107
<<<END_PAGE_111>>>

<<<PAGE_112>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 108

Cognitive Enhancement

Fundamentals of cognition 2.1.1

One of the fundamental goals of neuroscience is to understand how  the brain’s physical processes give rise to the mind’s functions, such as  perception, memory, decision-making and learning. Recent breakthroughs  have been made in this area through recording neural activity on large  scales and by using optogenetics, chemogenetics and electrical stimulation  to explore the functions and processes of specific brain circuits.5

It is now clear that cognitive processes are dynamic and distributed, making  them extremely difficult to investigate and model.6 However, researchers  are beginning to unify insights across species and scales — from synaptic  plasticity to network-level population dynamics — and are moving towards an  understanding of integrated, systems-level frameworks.7

AI is also beginning to play an important role in developing our understanding  of the brain. Researchers are using large-scale AI models to analyse massive  neural datasets and to identify functions of neural systems. Deep learning can  predict neural responses and develop representations similar to those in the  biological brain. This approach is helping to identify underlying mechanisms  of cognition.8 Meanwhile, generative AI systems are able to reconstruct  images and speech directly from brain activity, offering a window into thought  processes and new avenues for restoring communication.

A more ambitious goal is the creation of a functional digital twin of the brain.9  This would be a high-fidelity computational model focused on the brain’s  information processing rather than its precise physical structure. Achieving  this requires the analysis and fusion of high-resolution neural data from many  experiments and individuals to build a predictive model capable of running  in silico experiments on brain behaviour. Achieving this could dramatically  accelerate the research and development of neural therapies.

A better understanding of human cognition, which is extremely data- and  energy-efficient, could also lead to more efficient AI systems that mimic the  brain’s architecture. Such “neuromorphic” computing systems are being  developed for two key areas. The first is heterogeneous computing, where  neuromorphic chips handle specific tasks within conventional devices. The  second, and potentially more impactful, is “edge” computing, enabling  powerful AI to run on small, portable devices without relying on the cloud.10

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Practical neuromorphic  applications emerge

“Edge” computing  applications that  use neuromorphic  principles make  devices like sensors  and wearables more  efficient by running on  field-programmable  gate arrays (FPGAs) that  emulate neuromorphic  circuits.

Efforts to build a digital  twin of the brain accelerate

Functional digital twins  emerge for specific,  well-understood brain  systems such as the  visual cortex in primates.

Digital modelling improves  intervention outcomes

Digital models of brains  help predict outcomes  of interventions and  perform experiments  in silico rather than in  people and animals.  Whole-brain recording  remains a challenge due  to the enormous data- processing challenges   of sensing every neuron.
<<<END_PAGE_112>>>

<<<PAGE_113>>>
Cognitive Enhancement

2.1.2

Understanding how neural activity leads to thought, intention and  behaviour requires the use of a number of neurotechnology tools that are   in various stages of development. Large-scale electrophysiology,  implantable recording devices, high-resolution imaging and adaptive  decoding algorithms are enabling researchers to capture and model the  dynamics of cognition and internal brain states in real time.11,12,13,14 As datasets  grow in complexity, the focus will shift to extracting generalisable rules  from these resources. AI is becoming important here: AI-driven models can  analyse vast datasets from multiple individuals to create more precise and  generalisable representations of brain states.15

Progress in decrypting neural states will provide opportunities to regulate  brain states using brain-computer interfaces (BCIs). The use of AI in the  development of BCIs has potential for revolutionising treatments for  neuropsychiatric disorders and for the possibility of enhancing human  cognition.16 Disentangling the neural signals relevant to a specific condition,  like depression, from the myriad of other brain activities remains a challenge.  The vision is to develop sophisticated closed-loop systems that would  continuously record brain activity while AI algorithms decode internal states  such as mood and then guide personalised therapies in real time. These  interventions could range from deep brain stimulation to pharmacology.

A more futuristic and complex vision involves a true fusion of brain and  computer, creating a single enhanced mind. However, a fundamental obstacle  is the unique variability of individual brains, which can be modelled only  neuron by neuron. The scale of this challenge suggests that this kind of model  of the brain will remain out of reach for the foreseeable future.

Decrypting the brain

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Foundation models of the  brain are driven by AI

AI-driven models  become capable of  aggregating information  from across different  individuals to more  accurately read out and  understand complex  emotional and cognitive  states.

The ability to regulate  certain brain states  becomes possible

The focus in research  shifts from reading  brain states to actively  regulating some of  them, like depressed  mood, allowing a move  towards therapeutic  intervention.

Brain-control systems  revolutionise therapies   for some disorders

Built-in, closed-loop  control systems  seamlessly decode and  regulate a wide variety  of cognitive and internal  states, revolutionising  therapies for many brain  disorders.

109
<<<END_PAGE_113>>>

<<<PAGE_114>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 110

Cognitive Enhancement

2.1.3 Neuromodulation systems

Neuromodulation systems are a class of medical technologies that act   to alter or modulate neural activity. Precise, targeted modulation of neural  circuits is emerging as a powerful approach to influence attention, learning,  memory and affective states.

The operation of such systems relies on understanding — gained through  techniques ranging from deep-brain stimulation and transcranial electrical  and magnetic stimulation to optogenetics and chemogenetics — of how  specific patterns of stimulation can shape behaviour and cognition. Yet the  future of neuromodulation lies not only in stimulation techniques, but in  adaptive, feedback-driven systems that can respond to neural and behavioural  states in real time.17

Materials science remains a significant roadblock. Current implantable  systems are built from a narrow range of materials, usually dry, rigid  electronics, that are in stark contrast to biological tissue, which is soft   and dynamic. This disparity hinders the development of higher-resolution  brain-computer interfaces: future progress depends on materials that are  flexible enough to cope with the movement of neural tissue, biocompatible  and capable of being miniaturised and packaged in a way that protects the  electronics within the body.18 While current research is promising, introducing  new materials and manufacturing techniques is a slow process because of the  extensive testing and approval required.19

Beyond electronics, alternative forms of modulation include optogenetics20  and sonogenetics,21 which offer higher selectivity but require substantial  material and manufacturing innovations. Significant clinical testing will   also be necessary.

Another key area of development is the detailed mapping of the brain’s  connectome, cell function and spatial arrangement on the scale of individual  neurons.22 These maps are already becoming available for animal models and  will enable more precise, targeted neuromodulation and closed-loop systems  that can record and stimulate neural activity with high precision.

25-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON

Full human brain‑cell   atlas published

Researchers map the  complete connectome  of non-human primates  and release a full  human brain-cell atlas  that details the spatial  arrangement of all cell  types in the brain.

Genetic brain therapies  controlled by light and  sound

Optogenetic and  sonogenetic therapies  are approved for use  in humans, offering  more selective ways of  regulating brain activity.  Ethical concerns remain.

Advanced biocompatible  materials allow brain  enhancement

A wide range of flexible,  biocompatible materials  that can be safely  implanted into the brain  become widely available  for applications ranging  from mood therapy  to brain-functional  enhancement. The  mesoscopic connectome  of the human brain is  completed for normal  and various disease  states.
<<<END_PAGE_114>>>

<<<PAGE_115>>>
Cognitive Enhancement

Exogenous cognition 2.1.4

One of the most transformative prospects in cognitive enhancement is the  integration of artificial cognitive systems with biological brains. Our mental  processes are already extending beyond our brains, relying on external, often  technological, tools and systems to perform cognitive tasks. Advances in AI —  particularly in foundation models, adaptive agents and generative tools —  offer the potential to extend memory, decision-making and learning even  further beyond the biological substrate.

As brain-computer interfaces mature, and as models become more  context‑aware and biologically informed, new hybrid cognitive architectures  may emerge. Non-invasive BCIs, such as glasses23 and earbuds with  integrated physiological sensors, are already collecting vast amounts of  data,24 which, when combined with AI, could lead to cognitive offloading and  augmentation.25,26

Invasive BCIs —implants inserted into the brain via a small craniotomy27 — have  even deeper potential. Neuralink, a privately funded company, has developed  a hermetically sealed implant that translates motor intentions into digital  commands (and vice versa) with immediate applications in restoring function  to individuals with paralysis. Patients are already using Neuralink interfaces to  control a virtual hand and play games, and the ambition is significantly greater:  the company envisions an ability to treat blindness and aphasia, the full-body  control of exoskeletons, and perhaps pain and mood management.

Such advanced BCIs raise significant concerns about data privacy,28 the  potential for misuse of personal brain data and the risk of creating a  dependency on technology that could diminish natural cognitive abilities.  Given the eventual — beyond 2050 — possibilities of direct cerebral  advertisements, identity hacking and the potential for identity destruction, the  ethical landscape that will emerge over the next few decades will be complex.  A careful, nuanced and informed approach will be required as AI integrates  with human consciousness.

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Spinal-cord injuries are  mitigated through BCIs

As well as more  advanced non‑invasive  therapeutic  interventions, BCIs  with 10,000 electrodes  are implanted into the  human cortex, providing  enhanced therapeutic  interventions for  spinal‑cord injuries.  Ethical concerns over  BCI hacking and artificial  consciousness are widely  debated.

BCIs enable mood  management

Implants with up to  50,000 electrodes  connect into deeper  brain areas such as the  thalamus, allowing  pain relief and mood  management. They  also allow battlefield  applications such as  machines controlled  by humans fighting  each other. Progress  with less invasive  technologies — glasses,  sensors and earbuds,  for example — creates  a highly competitive  market for applications  such as virtual meetings,  stimulating faster BCI  development across  the whole range of  technologies.

Whole-brain interfaces  become possible with BCI  technology

Whole-brain interfaces  using BCIs with millions  of electrodes allow  cognitive enhancement  and the treatment of  complex conditions  like memory loss and  psychosis. Less invasive  technologies become  widely used, giving  access to personal  “daemons” that provide  virtual support.

111
<<<END_PAGE_115>>>

<<<PAGE_116>>>
HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE

HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE

112 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

2.2 2.2

Cell and Gene   Engineering

CHAIR:   Robin Lovell-Badge

Principal Group Leader in the Stem Cell Biology  and Developmental Genetics Laboratory at The  Francis Crick Institute, London, UK

CONTRIBUTORS:   Samira Kiani, Isabelle Mansuy, Kelly Ormond,  Alex Chavez, Philip Kim

Gene editing has achieved significant successes  in a range of areas and has gained regulatory  approval for targeting cancer,1,2,3 eye diseases4 and  blood diseases.5 Its next act will be to move from  rare and difficult diseases into more common  disorders and cancers, and from there into cracking  the fundamentals of ageing.

The ultimate goal for gene editing is a one‑shot  wonder drug — a one-time injection that  cures heritable or acquired disease for the rest  of the patient’s life. However, it is becoming  increasingly clear that the gene-editing tool that  has underpinned most clinical and research  breakthroughs will not be the main way forward.  CRISPR, an editor that can snip DNA to alter its  sequence, also creates dangerous and irreversible  breaks in DNA.6 The future of gene editing will rely  on new, more efficient, more accurate techniques  now under investigation and in early trials, along with  novel ideas about how to manipulate the genome  indirectly, transiently and even perhaps reversibly.

They will also rely on improved delivery methods.  Today, most gene editing is not applied to living  embryos or directly done on patients, but is ex  vivo: as, for example, in treatments for sickle-cell  anaemia.7 But this limits the number of diseases that  can be targeted. Targeted payload delivery is being  developed to be more precise and less toxic, thereby  creating fewer side effects and immune reactions.  This could deliver the editor into tissues that have  been hard to reach before. Better diagnostics, editors  and delivery methods could be a result of advances in  machine learning. AI could make it easier to diagnose  and even predict heritable disorders.

It is generally agreed that future research needs  to move forward with an eye to lowering the  staggering costs of gene therapy. Currently, the  biggest barriers to making gene editing a medical  reality are not only technological: they also include  public-health messaging, infrastructure and cost.  Recently approved haemophilia and sickle-cell  disease therapies cost $2 million to $3 million.8  The expense is multifactorial, but new initiatives  are under way to make such treatments cheaper  and more accessible.9 Crucial to the future of  scientific success will be public acceptance and  understanding that this is not always led by the  West.10 As this therapeutic modality moves into more  medical interventions, more infrastructure needs to  be developed to address the interpretability of the  science (for example, genetic counsellors are   needed to interpret genetic test results but are   in short supply).
<<<END_PAGE_116>>>

<<<PAGE_117>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

Editing human genetics is a promising route  towards disease prevention and reduction.  Work to improve Diagnostics tools for reading  and interpreting the genome has achieved fast  identification of pathogens and promises to enable  insight into the most suitable gene therapies  for an individual. This will be complemented by  developments in Next-generation editors and  delivery, which will manipulate the genome in ways  that avoid unwanted immune-system responses.   A number of processes will benefit from Engineered  organisms and AI-based tools, such as testing of  proposed therapies on synthetic organisms and  accelerated reading of whole genomes through the  use of AI. Researchers are exploring Alternatives to  direct gene editing, including epigenome editing,  which might facilitate the fine-grained control of  gene expression.

2.2 	 Cell and Gene Engineering

SUB-TOPICS

2.2.1	 Diagnostics

2.2.2	 Next-generation editors  and delivery

2.2.3	Engineered organisms  and AI-based tools

2.2.4	Alternatives to direct   gene editing

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

The relatively low Anticipation Potential scores  for the sub-topics covered in the Cell and Gene  Engineering topic are linked to lower transformative  effects scores and the high awareness they benefit  from. The ability to use AI to engineer new organisms  is still in its early phase and will require more than  10 years of further research before transformative  effects on society and the economy start to be seen.  Combined with the high uncertainty, this explains  the higher Anticipation Potential score for this field.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/cell-gene

113
<<<END_PAGE_117>>>

<<<PAGE_118>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 114

Cell and Gene Engineering

Diagnostics 2.2.1

Reading and interpreting the genome — whole-genome sequencing of  patient DNA — is increasingly common in medical practice for developing  and adequately deploying therapeutics. Better reading technologies have  already helped to diagnose disease, genetic predispositions to disease and  even infections.11 For example, the CRISPR-Cas system is enabling the fast  detection of pathogens: Cas12a has detected hepatitis B in less than 30  minutes.12 More typically, sequencing is now possible in hours to days.13  Costs are also falling.14

Faster, better and cheaper diagnostics coming into the mainstream will  act as a fact-checker on the new generations of genome editors, detecting  and preventing DNA-editing errors. These technologies need to be further  refined to ensure every laboratory can easily adopt them when in vivo editing  becomes mainstream.

Much progress will be thanks to the new ability to do long-read sequencing,  more accurate than the previously more common usage of short-read  sequencing. This could identify more clinically relevant gene variants and it  could also provide epigenetic information that can bring epigenome editing  to the clinic.15 Diagnostics will be able to tell patients what kind of gene  therapy they are suited for, or even which interventions and lifestyle changes  will most affect their chances of expressing a genetic disease. However,  analysis and interpretation are a major bottleneck: a shortage of genetic  counsellors is an increasing problem.16

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Faster, cheaper, better  diagnostics become  available

CRISPR-based  diagnostic methods are  developed for a variety  of targets, including  cancer, viruses and  other pathogens. Rapid,  reliable, widespread  whole‑genome  sequencing shortens  rare-disease diagnosis  and cancer diagnosis,  prognosis and  management. Cost  drops to $100 to $200 a  genome.17 Therapeutic  investment explodes.  Genome targeting for  pathogen diagnosis  comes to point-of-care  settings, including  pharmacogenomics  when drugs are  prescribed. AI interprets  sequencing.

Genome-reading finds a  broad range of applications

The time for whole- human-genome  sequencing drops to  an hour. Same-day  diagnosis of cancers and  rare diseases shortens  time to treatment.  Genome sequencing  influences retirement  plans and insurance. AI  helps fill unmet need   for genetic counsellors.

Gene-reading goes  mainstream

Rapid diagnostics  enable to-go or  home‑based devices  for pathogen detection  and better prediction  of complex diseases.  Editing technology  combined with AI  obviates most genetic  concerns over partner  choice. Heritability  and environmental  conditions are included  in assessments of  polygenic risk scores for  everything from cancer  to obesity.
<<<END_PAGE_118>>>

<<<PAGE_119>>>
Cell and Gene Engineering

2.2.2

CRISPR-Cas9 is now the most widely used gene-editing technology in the  world, successfully treating blood diseases, cancers and eye diseases.18  Several therapies have been approved for clinical use and many more are in  trials. However, CRISPR’s ability to correct gene defects depends on making  double-strand breaks that are repaired by cellular processes. It is increasingly  accepted that such double-strand breaks are dangerous,19 resulting in  potential chromosomal rearrangements or loss.20 Drugs in the pipeline  will not be abandoned, but future therapies will rely on more efficient and  accurate techniques.

The two likeliest candidates are base and prime editing. Base editing is powerful  against point mutations, which account for 80 per cent of human genetic  diseases.21 It also enables mitochondrial gene editing, which is harder to achieve  with CRISPR.22 Prime editing is also more specific and accurate, and new  research continues to enhance its efficiency.23 Research is under way to replicate  CRISPR successes in sickle-cell disease and beyond with base and prime  editing.24,25,26 Prime editing can target multiple genes at the same time.27,28

Modified adeno-associated viruses (AAVs) can deliver gene editors, although  the large quantities required can trigger dangerous immune responses. Efforts  are under way to re-engineer AAVs to be bigger and evade immune response.  One alternative is more efficient lentiviral vectors, or viruses engineered to  make them preferentially infect specific cell types, for example neural cells or  airway cells.29

Non-viral delivery has become an increasingly viable alternative, thanks to rapid  progress in the use of lipid nanoparticles and inorganic nanoparticle-based  delivery systems.30,31

Next-generation editors and delivery

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Ex vivo and in vivo  therapies advance

More large-scale phase‑III  clinical trials for ex vivo  therapies take place,  with more therapeutics  approved and  commercially licensed.32  Patient data shows mid- stage results of CRISPR- based haemophilia and  retinitis pigmentosa  therapies now in trials.33,34  Early-stage clinical trials of  in vivo editing techniques,  targeting easily accessible  tissues such as the eye35  or liver, show results. In  vivo therapies move to  experimental clinics.  CRISPR corrects for  mitochondrial genetic  disease in IVF. Next- generation “one‑shot”  genome editors in vivo  show long‑term safety  data in clinical trials.36  Base editing gets into  major tissues.37

Safer germline editing  blurs boundaries between  therapy and prevention

Inhaled and other  new delivery methods  move into the clinic.  Epigenome editing has  its first trials, targeting  chronic diseases. New  non-viral delivery  techniques reduce the  need for large doses, also  reducing cost. Adenosine  transversion editors  expand the capabilities  and applications of base  editing.38 Heritable gene  editing begins to gain  limited acceptance,  although not everywhere,  as a consequence of  successful somatic  techniques and  preclinical safety  data. Base and prime  editing enable in vivo  therapeutics, bringing  costs of therapy down.

Polygenic editing erodes  boundaries between  therapy and enhancement

In vitro-derived gametes  can be edited safely  before implantation.  Many forms of gene  editing are mainstream.  It becomes possible to  engineer protection  from radiation, chemical  warfare and infectious  diseases by altering  single genes, enabling  military applications  as well as casual space  travel. We use gene  technologies to correct,  slow down or even  reverse processes linked  to premature ageing  to increase healthspan.  A sleep-shortening  gene is the first popular  enhancement. Up- and  down-regulating some  specific genetic elements  enhances some aspects  of cognition.

115
<<<END_PAGE_119>>>

<<<PAGE_120>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 116

Cell and Gene Engineering

Engineered organisms and AI-based tools 2.2.3

AI promises to accelerate drug discovery.39 Synthetic organisms and AI will  help advance genome editing for human applications in several crucial  ways, including improved ways to deliver the editing payload to the cell and  experimental organisms that provide a better proxy for human testing.40

AI will help to quickly scan whole genomes and then design vectors that can  be used more universally. Work is also under way in AI design of entirely new  proteins and editors.41 However, human screeners are still needed to identify  the small percentage that will work as they are meant to. This situation may  improve with access to more training data. Generally, advances here will  require more collaboration between mathematicians and biologists.

Furthermore, machine-learning algorithms may help identify the relationships  among genes, gene networks and other variables (such as epigenetic factors)  involved in disease, as well as the potential consequences of edits to these.42  AI-enabled searches through microbial data obtained from uncultivated  samples may reveal more suitable enzymes — helicases, nucleases, transposases  or recombinases — that solve the problems of currently available editors.

Recent rapid advances in stem-cell engineering, stem-cell-derived embryo  models, organoids (artificial and simplified versions of an organ) and tissue  engineering are helping research move towards providing experimental  organisms based on human physiology that will help predict the functionalities  of genome editors outside the human body and before clinical applications.43,44

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Synthetic biology circuits  go in vivo

Extremely rapid progress  in machine learning and  AI solves many obstacles  to engineering proteins  and enzymes. AI helps  create de novo gene  editor. Genome reading  and writing allows us  to build large genetic  circuits composed  of many repeated  guide RNA sequences  that enable us to  simultaneously target  multiple genes. AI leads  to engineered proteins  and enzymes.

Chimeras, synthetic viruses  and other models become  mainstream

Synthetic-biology circuits,  now in mammalian cell  cultures, find applications  in vivo and for enhanced  control of genome  editors for gene therapies.  Chimeras generated  by injecting human  stem cells into animal  embryos grow organs for  xenotransplantation or  grow human-like brain  structures to study the  effects of gene edits.  Improved synthetic  viruses and genome  editors knock out genes  in animal organs to  supply the increasing  need for organ donation  without the risk of  rejection. Engineered  cells and tissues serve as  novel delivery systems to  easily grafted tissues such  as bone and skin.

Universal editors emerge

Engineered cells and  tissues are grafted into  complex tissues like the  brain or the endocrine  system. With prime and  base editing, plus tissues  grown outside the  body and reimplanted,  modification becomes  easier and cheaper,  rivalling in vivo.  Genetically modified  viruses, synthetic viruses  and large genetic circuits  are widely deployed  for pre-emptive “gene  surgery” on otherwise  healthy people, directly  linking genetic circuits to  genome editors. We see  the first demonstration in  humans of universal cells  carrying gene circuitry.
<<<END_PAGE_120>>>

<<<PAGE_121>>>
Cell and Gene Engineering

2.2.4

Existing approaches to gene editing are all-or-nothing: gene sequences  are altered, removed or added. However, some diseases manifest through  inadequate gene expression that is dialled too far up or down rather than  turned on or off. This means that, in some cases, techniques such as editing  the epigenome may be a better option.45 Simply adding or removing the  chemical tags that adorn DNA, for instance, could dial down or up expression  of certain genes or variants without the risk of dangerous mutations.  Epigenetic mechanisms include histone modifications and DNA methylation;  manipulating the factors that control these can be both tuneable and  reversible, and could be especially useful for controlling more than one gene.46  Once considered a dark art, epigenome editing is now rapidly advancing.47

Another approach, editing RNA, could open up much more common diseases  like chronic pain. Some drugs are already in clinical trials.

Alternatives to direct gene editing

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Disease spread is monitored  through metagenomics

Metagenomics advances  make it possible to  monitor the emergence  (or re-emergence) of  viral diseases with the  goal of containing their  spread. Epigenome  editors alter epigenetic  state at precise locations  within the genome,  lowering the chance of  immune response, and  are fine-tuned for first  use on disease genes  and tissues, and tested  in vivo. New sequencing  methods identify  epigenetic modifications  while preserving the  accuracy of genome  sequencing. Insights  are gained into how  interventions like diet  and exercise alter  gut microbiome.

Epigenome editors  are fine-tuned

Metagenomics becomes  a standard tool for  microbial ecology  laboratories, using  methods similar to gene  fingerprinting to profile  microbial communities.  Epigenome editing  becomes titratable.

Cosmetic gene editing  becomes possible

Delivery methods of  enzymes and editors —  whether gene or  epigenome — become  straightforward and  open to dynamic control.  Epigenome editing  helps people temporarily  mute some genes or  express others, making  for temporary alterations  including night vision  and resistance to  radiation, viruses and  chemical weapons.  Cosmetic mutations,  such as temporary  eye-colour changes,  are popular in body- hacking subcultures.  Fundamental alterations  to the microbiome make  humans capable of  digesting cellulose  or extracting nutrition  from plastic.

117
<<<END_PAGE_121>>>

<<<PAGE_122>>>
HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE

118 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

2.3

Healthspan Extension

CHAIR:   Vera Gorbunova

Doris Johns Cherry Professor of Biology at the  University of Rochester, New York, and Co-Director  of the Rochester Aging Research Center

CONTRIBUTORS:   Peter Adams, Collin Ewald, Luigi Ferrucci,  John Sedivy, Andrei Seluanov,  Joseph Takahashi, Tony Wyss-Coray,  Jing-Dong Jackie Han

Ageing was once thought to be an inescapable   fact of human life. Recently, however, geroscience  has begun to find ways to separate the  accumulation of chronological years from issues  such as frailty, weakened immune response  and the chronic diseases of age, such as  neurodegenerative and metabolic disorders, and  most cancers. Though they were once considered  an inevitable consequence of the passing of  time, these and other “hallmarks of ageing” may  be amenable to modulation. It is even possible  that they may be caused by a single underlying  biological process that could provide a powerful  intervention target. This raises the possibility   of not only preventing diseases individually but  reversing the entire process that underpins their  development.

A growing set of useful, well-characterised  biomarkers is making it increasingly possible   to predict what the unfolding of biological processes  over time will do to a specific individual’s health.  Among the most widely used is a statistical tool  known as an epigenetic clock, which can benchmark  the comparative rate of deterioration of an individual  or their organs against population data. This  measure of biological (rather than chronological)  age offers not only diagnosis but new therapeutic  targets. Abnormally fast deterioration, identified via  these biomarkers,1 may be corrected by epigenome  editing to restore the system to a youthful state,   for instance.

The ability to tinker with ageing via epigenetic  modification is only one part of an ongoing  reassessment of the wider human genome and  how we can interact with it to extend healthy life.  The non-coding elements that make up 98 per cent  of the genome — until recently dismissed as “junk  DNA” — have been revealed as an important  but poorly understood source of age-related  physiological deterioration. Now recast as the   “dark genome”, this vast trove of elements may also  prove a new source of biomarkers to diagnose and  promote longevity and health.

Understanding how these elements change under  the influence of lifestyle factors — exercise, diet,  habits and so on — to accelerate or decelerate  biological ageing is also a fast-moving area of  research. A deeper understanding of the dark  genome and epigenetic rejuvenation will reveal why  certain lifestyle factors affect populations differently.  Meanwhile, we are already entering an era of  “lifestyle mimetics”: clinical trials are under way on  small-molecule drugs that chemically imitate the  consequences of lifestyle choices that contribute to  resilience (fasting, for instance) or suppress processes  that harm the system.

The most important focus in the near term is  validation of biomarkers and targets. However, this  will require better data, which can be obtained only  through finding new ways to raise funds for research  without compromising sensitive medical data.  Investigations of the dark genome will create vast  volumes of new data that could be usefully mined  by AI for new insights, but this can only happen with  innovative new trial designs built on a model that  assures patient data integrity and trust.
<<<END_PAGE_122>>>

<<<PAGE_123>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

Many decades after scientific insights significantly  extended human lifespan, research is making  inroads into improving our healthspan ­— the  amount of time for which we have a healthy,  productive existence. Research has begun to  identify important Biomarkers of ageing that  help to identify potential problems and enable  researchers to understand why some people age  more robustly than others. The epigenome, a suite  of mechanisms that regulate gene expression, are  strongly associated with ageing. Rejuvenating the  epigenome through various means is becoming  a viable path towards increasing healthspan. A  significant proportion of the genome that was  previously ignored as “junk” is also now a target  for healthspan extension. Certain parts of the dark  genome seem to be involved in a number of ageing- associated processes, and finding ways to intervene  here could prove impactful. Investigations of the role  of Lifestyle modification in ageing are also proving  fruitful. Patterns of sleep, exercise, nutrition and  circadian rhythms are all associated with ageing, and  improving the effectiveness of lifestyle interventions  and understanding the biological transducers  that mediate such effects could assist with the  development of drugs that engender them.

2.3 	 Healthspan Extension

SUB-TOPICS

2.3.1	 Biomarkers of ageing

2.3.2	 Rejuvenating the epigenome

2.3.3	Dark genome

2.3.4	Lifestyle modification

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

The role of biomarkers and lifestyle modification on  Healthspan Extension are reasonably well known,  and both fields are now seen as mature. There is,  however, relatively little awareness outside of the  scientific community on Biomarkers of ageing —  as a consequence, the need for multilateral action  is seen as high. Fully understanding the influence  that the Dark genome and transposable elements  have on ageing will remain a challenge for at least  25 years. Rejuvenating the epigenome is the area  with the highest scope for multilateral action.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/h-span

119
<<<END_PAGE_123>>>

<<<PAGE_124>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 120

Healthspan Extension

Biomarkers of ageing 2.3.1

Thanks to the interplay of their genes with environmental factors,   some people age more robustly than others. Years lived is therefore not  a reliable predictor of future health and longevity. Much more useful  is “biological age”, derived from analysis of biological factors known as  biomarkers. Research has identified a vast range of biomarkers that can   help chart the accumulation of molecular and cellular damage that leads   to age-dependent deterioration.2

Epigenetic clocks — a type of biomarker that estimates biological age by  analysing DNA-methylation patterns — can estimate accelerated biological  ageing in cells, tissues or organs.3 This is a means of identifying problematic  biochemical trends before diseases manifest. More recent advances integrate  statistics from multiple epigenetic biomarkers to predict mortality.4

Validating these biomarkers so that they are reliable and consistent is the  key to making biological age a useful tool. Because biomarkers are statistical  tools whose power lies in the amount of data that they can draw on, the more  population data that is available against which to benchmark individuals,  the more accurately the tools will be able to identify patterns and make  predictions. One promising model, the Global Neurodegeneration Proteomics  Consortium,5 combines the data of 40,000 individuals and solves data-privacy  issues via federation of access and cloud analysis. Mining this and future large  datasets, including the UK Biobank, will refine biomarkers of ageing.

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Beta testers and bigger   data assist research

Datasets get bigger  and more diverse.  New sample analysis  platforms make it  possible to compare  across cohorts for  many different studies.  More biomarkers are  validated, and more  companies use this  information, making  it available, initially,  to private customers.  Researchers begin  to analyse molecular  underpinnings of  previously published  clinical trials of successful  ageing interventions,  generating better  models and driving  deeper understanding.

Biological age is normalised

Validated biomarkers  enter the clinic more  widely, approved either as  companion diagnostics or  independent predictors.  Moderately invasive,  inexpensive biomarkers  of ageing, such as  age-related molecular  changes in blood, become  part of standard clinical  care and monitoring.  Measurements from  wearables collect  non‑invasive data that  has been validated  against epigenetic clocks,  allowing more data  to be collected. Large  cohorts and established  biobanks unlock genetic  information that leads to  better models of cognitive  decline. Research pins  down which diseases  are primarily caused by  biological ageing.

Biomarkers directly  improve healthspan

AI-led data analysis  robustly correlates  biomarkers of ageing  with the underlying  processes of ageing.  Researchers gain  a mechanistic  understanding of how  healthy and unhealthy  ageing diverge. Age care  based on personalised  biomarkers becomes  part of standard  medical care, resulting  in population-wide  improvements in  healthspan.
<<<END_PAGE_124>>>

<<<PAGE_125>>>
Healthspan Extension

2.3.2

The ageing process is associated with changes in the mechanisms that  regulate gene expression, including DNA methylation, histone modification  and chromatin remodelling. Though the underlying DNA sequence remains  unchanged, these disruptions to the epigenome impact cell and tissue  resilience against disease. Resetting an aged epigenome to a youthful state  therefore offers the prospect of rejuvenation rather than merely slowing the  pace of ageing: it makes cells, tissues and organisms actually younger rather  than simply slowing their decline.

Epigenetic reprogramming to turn the body’s somatic cells into pluripotent  cells has been investigated for decades. This is mediated by proteins called  transcription factors and has been shown to have rejuvenating effects in  preclinical trials.6 However, the mechanism (which uses four transcription  factors — known collectively as OSKM — that are delivered by viral payload)  carries an inherent risk of cancer.7 Safety will be key to human translation,  meaning that potentially cancer-causing transcription factors will need to be  replaced by small molecule drugs or other alternatives. Early work identifying  safer transcription factors, including HNF4 alpha, which can rejuvenate the liver,  is under way. The epigenome may also be targeted more indirectly, including  by the SIRT6 activator fucoidan or by forskolin.8

Instead of in vivo modification, ex vivo interventions could be undertaken to  reprogram aged stem cells before reintroducing them to the body. This would  allow more control of the process. This approach is a focus of current research  for reprogramming transplant organs, such as kidneys and hearts, which are  epigenetically rejuvenated before being introduced into a recipient.9

Rejuvenating the epigenome

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Ex vivo rejuvenation begins

Researchers investigate  a range of safer  transcription factors.  Trial results reveal  the biomarkers that  intervention affects  and identify specific  mechanisms of action.  Advances in biomarker  research clarifies the  distinction between  rejuvenation and  regeneration, helping to  focus future research on  rejuvenation.

Rejuvenation becomes safe

Livers, hearts and  kidneys are transplanted  after perfusion with  epigenome-modifying  agents that rejuvenate  the organs. In vivo  reprogramming of  specific pathologies is  tested on debilitating  single-tissue pathologies  for which risk is tolerable,  for example COPD,  chronic kidney disease  and rheumatoid arthritis.

In vivo rejuvenation  becomes widespread

In vivo reprogramming  targets normal human  ageing. Research  identifies a master cell  type that systemically  rejuvenates tissues,  enabling new forms of  intervention.

121
<<<END_PAGE_125>>>

<<<PAGE_126>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 122

Healthspan Extension

Dark genome 2.3.3

For decades, biomedical research has largely focused on the   1.5 per cent of the human genome that codes for proteins, dismissing   the rest as “junk DNA”. However, in light of recent insights into the millions  of repetitive DNA sequences it comprises, this “junk” has now been recast   as the “dark genome”.

Of particular interest for geroscience are transposons: repeating,  self‑replicating DNA sequences that can alter their location in the genome.10  Also known as “jumping genes”, they make up about half of the genome.   Their activity — which increases with an organism’s age — can alter  chromosome structure, destabilise the genome, trigger immune response  and inflammation,11 and create other conditions that have been tied to poor  health outcomes in old age.12 Turning them off seems to have broad health  benefits, as revealed in HIV antiretroviral therapies that turn off the “LINE”  transposons (among the most prevalent repeating sequences, and major  contributors to human genetic variation).13 This reverses the age-accelerating  effects of HIV with no health trade-offs.14 Doing so holds promise for other  diseases associated with LINE-1, such as rheumatoid arthritis15 and lupus.16

However, manipulating the dark genome will be more complex than simply  finding a general-purpose “off” switch. Preclinical trials are beginning to show  that, under certain conditions, some parts of the dark genome might have  beneficial effects. Also, a better understanding of how non-coding elements  interact with coding elements may yield a rich new source of new biomarkers  and potentially even therapies. Our understanding of the dark genome has  been hampered by technological limitations of DNA and RNA sequencing  requiring fragmentation followed by aligning to reference sequences to  forecast the underlying sequence. New technologies, including nanopore,  which allows direct reading of long sequences of DNA and RNA, are advancing  our understanding of the dark genome,17 but more research into these  intricate relationships and how to balance the trade-offs is needed. Excitingly,  the dark genome appears to be responsive to rejuvenation, so a better  understanding of rejuvenation may also shed light on it.

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Understanding  transposable elements

The interplay between  coding and non-coding  regions of the genome  is elucidated. The basic  understanding of the  dark genome — which  elements to repress and  with which drugs — is  established as a new  field.18 Using biomarkers  to establish causality,  researchers figure  out if these can be  used for therapy. Early  start-up trials yield  results repurposing  old drugs against  neurodegeneration in  ALS and autoimmune  diseases like lupus, and  more such trials ensue.

AI assists dark‑genome  research

AI identifies many  of the functions of  non-coding elements  and their effects on  healthspan. It becomes  possible to biochemically  separate adaptive from  maladaptive changes  induced by jumping  genes. First drugs  developed to target  specific transposable  elements. Dark genome  yields anti-cancer drugs.

Research identifies harmful  elements of dark genome

Identification of specific,  harmful elements that  carry no hidden benefits  to an organism leads to  improved therapies with  reduced side effects.   We untangle the other  ways activation of the  dark genome affects  multiple, often unrelated,  traits that affect  apparently unrelated  tissues and cell types.
<<<END_PAGE_126>>>

<<<PAGE_127>>>
Healthspan Extension

2.3.4 Lifestyle modification

Strong epidemiological evidence has confirmed that environment   and behaviour are important components of longevity. Sleep, nutrition,  exercise and other healthspan-affecting lifestyle choices can cause healthy  and unhealthy ageing to diverge.

What’s more, the interplay between two or more behavioural or environmental  interventions can amplify the efficacy of each, as suggested by mouse trials in  which calorie restriction’s moderate benefits for lifespan and healthspan were  multiplied several times over by combination with circadian timing patterns  of eating.19 However, how single or multiple behaviours are transduced into  cellular changes is an area of open research.

While that research continues, efforts are under way to find ways to boost  circadian rhythms associated with not just sleep/wake cycles but also body  temperature, blood pressure and so on. Their fluctuations are controlled  by time-keeping proteins encoded in master clock genes, and drugs that  enhance the master clocks could make us healthier. This should have  beneficial effects, since these clocks regulate the genes in all 12 hallmarks  of ageing pathways,20 and seem to regulate sleep, metabolism and  neurodegeneration. In mice, boosting clock gene expression yielded   a 15 per cent increase in lifespan.

Finding and measuring biomarkers that link lifestyle choices with clocks will  open the possibility of lifestyle mimetics, small-molecule drugs that could  manipulate the same pathways and slow ageing before disease manifests.

We may already be administering such drugs. The immunosuppressant  rapamycin, whose signalling is increasingly understood to influence longevity  and ageing, and the metabolic drug metformin have been in clinical trials for  their suspected ability to mimic lifestyle benefits. More recent investigations  have studied drugs that target sirtuins. Stimulation of sirtuin 6 (SIRT6)  has extended lifespan in mice, rejuvenated the epigenome and silenced  transposable elements. Activating SIRT6 or similar epigenetic regulators with  small molecules or natural compounds will provide safe ways to improve  healthspan.21 Fucoidan, a natural SIRT6-activating compound, is under test   in a clinical trial for its ability to slow the biomarkers of ageing in humans.

10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Role of circadian clocks  becomes clearer

Circadian clocks are  recognised as one of  the hallmarks of ageing  beyond metabolism and  immune functions, and  become more widely  appreciated in cancer  and neurodegeneration.  Measurement of the  resilience response  in humans becomes  possible. Research  reveals how clocks  mechanistically affect  healthy ageing.

Health-extending plans   are personalised

Personalised resilience  information helps  develop a lifestyle  prescription map based  on how an individual’s  body responds to  environmental stressors.  Researchers develop  small-molecule drug  candidates to enhance  clock function, with  benefits in longevity but  also short-term benefits  for health.

Interventions target   genetic vulnerabilities

Research insights  provide the basis  for personalised  interventions that  target the particular  needs of an individual’s  genetic vulnerabilities  and make the most of  their resiliences. This  would be a personalised  intervention mimicking  that person’s optimal  lifestyle choices.

123
<<<END_PAGE_127>>>

<<<PAGE_128>>>
HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE

124 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

2.4

Future of Consciousness

CHAIR:   Itzhak Fried

Professor of Neurosurgery, Psychiatry and  Biobehavioral Sciences in the David Geffen School  of Medicine and the Brain Research Institute at  UCLA, Los Angeles; Professor of Neurosurgery at  the Faculty of Medicine of Tel Aviv University, Israel

CONTRIBUTORS:   Sahba Nomvula Besharati, Olaf Blanke,  Patrick Butlin, Simon Brown, Guillaume  Dumas, Atsushi Iriki, Ryota Kanai, Christopher  Krupenye, Ken Paller, Megan Peters

Research over the last few decades has made  significant inroads into important issues such  as investigating disorders of consciousness,  understanding and treating coma and related  states, and determining how our biologically  evolved consciousness might be augmented   using biotechnology and/or silicon technologies   in the future.

As yet, science can offer no standard, widely  agreed definition of consciousness, partly because  researchers use the same word to describe a variety  of phenomena such as wakefulness, awareness,  attention, responsiveness to stimuli and inner life.   It is thus a field of broad interdisciplinary study.

There is also significant linguistic and cultural  variance in what people understand by the term  “consciousness”.1 This is also true of “disorders” of  consciousness: the experience of what might be  termed delusions or hallucinations by Western  medicine can be seen as normal and even valuable in  many cultures. Responses to the idea of non‑human  consciousness are also culturally differentiated.

Currently, there is no agreed theory of how  consciousness arises.2 However, progress is being  made here, particularly by the Cogitate consortium’s  innovative and rigorous experimental approach  to testing the predictions of two competing  leading theories within a framework of “adversarial  collaboration”.3 The lack of deep theoretical  understanding has not prevented the adoption   of technologies and conceptual advances that  help make decisions in a clinical setting.

We have devised methods to quantify the degree   of presence or absence of consciousness (as inner life,  awareness or mental response to stimuli), allowing us  to define whether a patient is in a vegetative state, for  instance, and to evaluate whether their consciousness  can be “augmented”, that is, shifted to a more elevated  state of consciousness, whether by intervention or  through the body’s natural healing processes.4

As with many medical applications, technologies  that spring from a clinical setting will eventually  benefit the broader population. This is because  the same technologies that diagnose or modulate  consciousness when there is a deficit or disorder  can be pressed into service to enhance or augment  healthy, functioning consciousness. They will also be  helpful in more philosophical areas, improving our  understanding of free will, the self and the ethics of  cases at the edges of sentience.

Meanwhile, work is under way to determine the  developmental emergence of consciousness in  humans5 and the extent to which machines and  animals can have or develop consciousness.6,7  Researchers also aim to understand whether  organoids and other synthetic biological organisms  are capable of developing a kind of consciousness.8  This is likely to spark debate on the ethics of the field  itself and of the assignment of moral status and rights.
<<<END_PAGE_128>>>

<<<PAGE_129>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

Although central to the experience of being human,  consciousness has proved difficult to investigate  scientifically, with researchers struggling to reach  consensus on many aspects of the field. While it is  clear that Human consciousness is a multifaceted  phenomenon, its relation to brain states — including  those induced by injury, degradation and trauma —  is dizzyingly complex. Understanding where,  when (and whether) Non-human consciousness  arises, whether in other animals or in machines,  together with the developmental origins of  consciousness in humans, is a useful path towards  further understanding of the brain and of the wider  phenomenon of consciousness. Drugs, electrical  stimulation and in some cases cell replacement,  genetic and other biotech interventions all show  promise for Modulation of consciousness for  therapeutic, recreational and knowledge-gathering  purposes. Eventually, we may be able to extend  the phenomenon to create Beyond-human  consciousness that augments our evolved abilities  in ways that might facilitate an existence lived  alongside intelligent machines.

2.4 	 Future of Consciousness

SUB-TOPICS

2.4.1	 Human consciousness

2.4.2	Non-human consciousness

2.4.3	Modulation of human consciousness

2.4.4	Beyond-human consciousness

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

Another area of high Anticipation Potential  score overall is the Future of Consciousness.  Understanding and modulating consciousness in  humans, animals and machines remains a huge  challenge, with major breakthroughs expected to  happen in 15 years. The route to get there remains  highly uncertain, which further contributes to  the high score. The possibility of augmenting  human consciousness and sharing it with other  entities is seen as most transformative for society.  The consequences of a better understanding of  human consciousness across stages in life and  medical conditions require the most coordinated  international action.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/f-cons

125
<<<END_PAGE_129>>>

<<<PAGE_130>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION

PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 126

Future of Consciousness

Human consciousness 2.4.1

Different kinds of consciousness are in play at different stages of human  development, from fetus through to early childhood and beyond. On top of  that, injury or disease can compromise human consciousness in a variety  of ways, such as that seen in vegetative-state patients and people suffering  from dementia. There is progress towards creating tests for consciousness.9

Understanding the difference between these various types of human  consciousness will be a vital part of the effort to treat injury and disease,  and to understand various aspects of human-rights issues associated with  consciousness. Research efforts are aiming to do this, with some success in  the application of diagnostic tools that can differentiate between a vegetative  state and a minimally conscious state, for instance.10 Functional MRI and EEG  can be used to demonstrate performance of cognitive tasks in some comatose  patients who do not follow verbal commands.11 Intervention in coma patients,  aiming at recovery, is becoming a realistic, if long-term, prospect.12,13 There is  hope that better understanding will help detect and assess early memory loss  in ageing and in Alzheimer’s disease, and guide treatment and care.14

At the other end of life the need to assess consciousness “in the cradle”, in the  prenatal and infant stages, is becoming an issue with medical, educational,  legal and ethical implications.15

Neurosurgical research demonstrates that specific neuronal activity  underlies the emergence of concepts, memories and intentions in human  consciousness. Recent work involving direct recordings from the human brain  has highlighted the role of specific regions of the thalamus in mediating  conscious perception, showing flow of involved information from these  thalamic nuclei to the prefrontal cortex.16 Further exploration here, with  emerging brain-recording and stimulation tools, partnered with AI-based  analysis, could help decode conscious and preconscious states.17,18 Interaction  with sleeping humans can also help to explore the space between the  conscious and unconscious brain.19

Such work could also help with fundamental science, such as developing  theoretical understanding of consciousness by identifying areas of interest  for probing the neural correlates of consciousness, and contribute to the  quantification and classification of consciousness in humans.

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Diagnosis of consciousness  improves

Brain-state diagnostics  improve, and machine  learning overcomes  individual patient  variability to assist in  prognosis and guide  rehabilitation. Specific  tests reliably detect early  onset of diseases that  disrupt consciousness.  Better computational  models improve our  understanding of the  systems biology that  contributes to conscious  states.

Guidelines for consciousness  assessment agreed

An agreed set of  international guidelines  (effectively a standard  scale) standardises  assessment of human  consciousness. Improved  imaging, combined with  AI pattern recognition,  leads to more reliable  prediction of which  patients are aware,  which will respond to  stimulation and which  will require implants  to communicate from  their vegetative state.  Neuroscientific tools give  a rudimentary ability  to decode the content  of dreams in sleeping  humans, as well as other  contents of conscious  experience.

Consciousness   evaluation evolves

Scientifically validated  assessment of presence  and quality of human  consciousness is  established, opening  up the possibility of  significant progress  on theories of  consciousness.  Brain machine interfaces  open up seamless  communication with  apparently unconscious  people, even restoring  natural consciousness  in some cases. Precision  neuropsychiatry  uses a suite of new  interventions —  technological and  chemical tools — to steer  consciousness away  from dangerous   or unwanted states.
<<<END_PAGE_130>>>

<<<PAGE_131>>>
Future of Consciousness

2.4.2

The challenge of reliably extrapolating from our understanding of human  consciousness, added to the inability of other animals to report experience,  means that it will always be difficult to determine how to approach the  issue of non-human consciousness and when, where and how it exists.

Interesting advances are being made in the study of machine  consciousness.20 Researchers are making progress in developing methods  to assess AI systems for consciousness21 and investigating machine  implementations of neuroscientific theories of consciousness.22   Efforts to understand whether machine consciousness is possible,   and what might constitute it, provide an important anchor for our  understanding of consciousness itself.23

In animals, the issue of consciousness is more immediate, pertaining to  issues of moral status, and with ramifications for agriculture and food  economics. A cohort of researchers have suggested there is “strong scientific  support for attributions of conscious experience to other mammals and to  birds”, and that “empirical evidence indicates at least a realistic possibility  of conscious experience in all vertebrates (including reptiles, amphibians,  and fishes) and many invertebrates (including, at minimum, cephalopod  mollusks, decapod crustaceans, and insects)”.24 This is a controversial claim,  but one that highlights the lack of agreement about the nature and extent of  consciousness in the natural world. Further exploration of the issue can only  improve our understanding of the phenomenon, although funding for this  work is limited.

There is also a growing awareness of the possibility that some rudimentary  form of consciousness could arise in brain organoids, which are proto-organs  grown in vitro from human brain tissue.25 However, despite the potential  ubiquity of non-human conscious experience, caution is needed due to the  possibility that very complex cognitive abilities can unfold without conscious  experience.26

Non-human consciousness

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Debates over non-human  consciousness take  centre stage

The capacity of AI  systems to mimic human  behaviour leads to  intense debate about  whether they might be  conscious. Arguments  from a consciousness  perspective lead many  species’ rights to become  more closely protected.

Non-human consciousness  sheds light on human  consciousness

Animal consciousness   is measured and assessed  by a wide-ranging set  of tests developed  for the assessment of  human consciousness  (and adapted for  non verbal responders  based on assessment  techniques developed  for human infants).  Machines that display  many characteristics  associated with human  consciousness are probed  as tools for understanding  how consciousness might  arise in humans — in  particular, for ascertaining  whether embodiment  plays a critical role.

Hybrid consciousness  improves learning

Neuro-inspired AI  systems (neuro-AI)   that help design  education curricula are  imbued with algorithms  that operate on an  improved understanding  of how humans  consciously learn,  creating a virtuous loop.

127
<<<END_PAGE_131>>>

<<<PAGE_132>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 128

Future of Consciousness

Modulation of human consciousness 2.4.3

We can modulate human consciousness by several methods. One is chemical:  there has been some significant progress in the use of psychedelic and  psychoactive drugs, for instance, to augment and alter consciousness.   New imaging techniques demonstrate the neurological details of these  alterations: psilocybin, for instance, produces a state of increased chaotic  brain activity and induces changes in frontal brain structures that may be  associated with the phenomenology of psychedelic experiences.27 Increasingly,  experience with chemical modulations of consciousness are proving useful in  medical contexts. Psilocybin and MDMA are being used to treat post-traumatic  stress disorder (PTSD) and depression, for example.28,29

Electrical modulation of consciousness is also seeing success in invasive   and non-invasive forms. Brain-computer interfaces are developing at pace.30

More precisely targeted non-invasive technology like transcranial direct-current  stimulation (tDCS) has successfully brought minimally conscious patients  back towards higher consciousness.31 Deep brain stimulation is showing  therapeutic promise for treating disorders of consciousness associated with  impaired arousal or awareness.32 “Closed-loop” neuromodulation is able to act  on, and sense, brain state based on feedback.33,34 There is also growing scope for  editing of memory and/or urges and wishes through electrical implants, as the  technological tools required are already available.35

Stem cells provide another approach to neuromodulation. Rat stem cells,   for instance, have restored sensory abilities within a mouse brain that had   its own olfactory neurons rendered inert.36 It seems that stem-cell injection   can modify the cellular composition of neural circuits, potentially altering  conscious experience.

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Brain modulation  experiments widen  their scope

Drug-control  frameworks are loosened  to allow PTSD and other  disorders of the brain  to be treated in wider  clinical settings using  psychedelics. Electrical  stimulation of the  brains of coma patients  sees some success in  re-establishing higher  levels of consciousness.  Clinical trials in selected  neurological and  psychiatric disorders  accelerate technologies  capable of extracting  information from  the brain, inserting  information or closing  the information loop,  thus enabling direct  modulation of conscious  states.

AI decodes the brain

Feedback from wearable  technology, electrical  implants and new  imaging techniques  enable patients to  modulate their own  conscious experience.   AI systems decode  neural signatures  of conscious urges  and intentions, and  inject signals useful  for therapeutic  treatment, including  rudimentary memory  editing. Psychedelic  drugs altering states  of consciousness enter  mainstream psychiatry.  Brain-machine interfaces  move from the clinical  environment to the  general population,  enabling enhancement  of conscious states.

Brain injuries are treated  with stem-cell therapy

Stem-cell therapies  rewire patients’ brains  after injury. Engineered  highly specific  psychedelics transform  trauma treatment and  neuropsychiatry, and  enter selective use in  general populations.  Memory-editing and  selective memory  chips become a widely  available therapeutic  and enhancing option.
<<<END_PAGE_132>>>

<<<PAGE_133>>>
Future of Consciousness

2.4.4

In humans it may be possible to augment normal consciousness using drugs,  neurotechnology or genetic interventions, as evidenced by experiments in  animals.37 Some researchers have used wearable technologies or implants  to give themselves magnetic senses, for instance,38 or the ability to cross  modalities and feel sound.39

Newly developed brain-to-brain interfaces — currently possible invasively in  animals40 and non-invasively in humans41 — may allow direct communication  between two brains without involving the peripheral nervous system,  instantiating intelligence and perhaps consciousness that has a distributed or  collective aspect.42 In addition, two-person fMRI scanning and hyperscanning43  is opening up new possibilities of shared experience leading to some form of  shared consciousness.44

Experiments in robotics are indicating that robots might learn the ability   to think in abstract terms, planning and estimating the outcomes of  prospective actions without the need to physically execute them. This may  have application in averting workplace accidents and recovering from  damage.45 Via brain-computer interfaces (BCIs), robot self-simulation may also  open up pathways for humans to augment their experience. There is scope for  human-machine hybrid “teams” to improve industrial decision-making   and other tasks.46

Beyond-human consciousness

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Humans begin to adopt  augmentations

There is greater  adoption of wearable or  remotely controllable  robotic technologies  in factories and for  special applications. A  new online database of  nootropic drugs seeks  to track them and make  clinicians aware of their  effects and proliferation.  BCIs move beyond labs  toward new, more diverse  use cases. Virtual reality  (VR) and augmented  reality (AR) offer visual  overlays representing  other people’s heart  rate and blood pressure,  letting willing participants  “see” each others’ inner  emotional state. Brain  interfaces allow for direct  communication between  two brains, bringing us  a step closer to a “social  network of brains.”

Engineered body  enhancements  become available

Targeted gene therapy  allows augmentation of  sensory scope, such as  “seeing” in the infrared  part of the spectrum,  and a few body-hacking  enthusiasts choose to  augment their natural  senses with new  engineered ones. VR  and AI-driven simulation  allows us to visit the  future and the past  by making immersive,  realistic “dress  rehearsals” for future  events and by putting us  into our own memories.

The era of consciousness  engineering and  meta‑humans arrives

Increasing understanding  of the neurobiology  of consciousness  coupled with major  advances in neuro-AI  establishes consciousness  engineering as a major  discipline. For a sector  of society, permanent  connections with  machines create blurred  boundaries between  different selves and  between natural and  artificial realities. It  becomes possible to  better incorporate the  perspectives of other  people and other species  within an individual’s  experience.

129
<<<END_PAGE_133>>>

<<<PAGE_134>>>
HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE

130 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

2.5

Engineering Human  Biology

CHAIR:   Robin Lovell-Badge

Principal Group Leader in the Stem Cell Biology   and Developmental Genetics Laboratory   at The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK

CONTRIBUTORS:   Simon Yifei Miao, Naomi Moris, Bernardo Oldak,  Nicolas Rivron, Peter Zandstra, Joy Zhang

Re-engineering human biology is increasingly  possible, largely thanks to the convergence of three  developments. One is the rapid improvement   in our understanding of how tissues, organs and  embryos develop.1 The other is the emergence   of new technologies such as genome synthesis  and editing, tissue engineering and the lab-based  growth of replicas of organs and embryos.   The third is the development of comprehensive   in silico models of developmental processes.   This pairing of fundamental knowledge and  emergent technologies has rendered engineering  (and re-engineering) the components of our   bodies increasingly practical.

These developments are likely to have considerable  benefits for human health and well-being. However, it is  crucial to separate true potential from utopian hype.   A great deal of venture-capital money has been thrown  at the prospect of reversing ageing and radically  extending human lifespans, for instance, but there  are more immediate and wide-reaching benefits from  tackling major killers such as cardiovascular disease  and cancer, as well as chronic conditions like bone  degeneration and immune suppression. Lab-grown  “organoids” may ultimately offer an alternative to organ  donation. Furthermore, an improved understanding   of embryonic development may lead to treatments for  a host of congenital conditions.

Despite this potential, the complexity of the systems  in the human body remains a challenge. “Digital  twins” of the human body2 may help here,3 as will the  development of new technologies and therapeutics.4  Likewise, specialised AIs that can sift through the  vast datasets on human biology are likely to offer  great insights. Studying how extreme environments  like space affect our biology will also aid our  understanding.5

There are also profound issues of ethics and social  acceptance. For instance, some technologies require  working with human embryos. Many people are  also wary of anything they perceive as unnatural.  Sustained, long-term public engagement is required:  the successful use of pronuclear transfer to enable   UK children to be born without mitochondrial disease,  begun 25 years ago through early conversations   with policy-makers, media and regulators, offers   a good model.6
<<<END_PAGE_134>>>

<<<PAGE_135>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

It is increasingly possible to exert control over how  cells behave and even how they develop. Scaled up,  these technologies offer the prospect of engineering  entire tissues. Cellular (re-)programming and tissue  development are leading to new therapeutics. In  parallel, researchers have developed methods to  study the rules governing development. Organoids  are simplified replicas of organs that can be grown  in a lab: they enable the study of processes that  were previously inaccessible. The large amount of  data emerging from these systems is driving the  development of in silico “digital twins” of organ  functions and early human development, which  should further accelerate our understanding  of fundamental developmental processes and  interventions that lead to better health. Similarly,  Model embryos allow researchers to study how  human embryos develop. Both technologies  could ultimately lead to treatments for congenital  conditions. In the longer term, researchers may   be able to create Synthetic human genomes.   This represents a huge technical challenge,   but offers the possibility of understanding and  perhaps eliminating a host of inherited conditions.

2.5 	 Engineering Human Biology

SUB-TOPICS

2.5.1	 Cellular (re-)programming   and tissue development

2.5.2	 Organoids

2.5.3	 Model embryos

2.5.4	Synthetic human genomes

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

The topics with the highest transformative  potentials are Cellular (re)programming and tissue  engineering and Organoids. These fields will reach  maturity in eight and four years respectively. The  need for multilateral action is highest for Organoids.  Synthetic human genomes still require 20 years  of significant work before reaching maturity, and  progress in this area remains highly uncertain.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/eng-bio

131
<<<END_PAGE_135>>>

<<<PAGE_136>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 132

Engineering Human Biology

Cellular (re-)programming   and tissue development  2.5.1

Through a deeper understanding of the structures and processes   within living cells, scientists are learning how to reprogram human cells.7  Cellular reprogramming can be used to reverse age-related changes in  cells.8 This enables the mechanisms of human ageing to be studied in vitro.9  It may also shed light on developmental disorders.10 By partially rejuvenating  cells while retaining their identity,11 it may be possible to restore lost  immune function12 and other ageing-related health conditions.13 There is  also potential to use viral vectors to reprogram specific cells: for instance,  reprogramming cancer cells in such a way that the immune system attacks  and destroys them.14

On a larger scale, these and other techniques can be used to grow tissues and  organs to order. To achieve this, it is necessary to first understand how those  tissues develop naturally, and research is under way on a host of body parts,  including the immune system, heart,15 muscle,16 breasts17 and skin.18 Replicating  the three-dimensional structures of organs and how they change over time  will be difficult, but bioprinting will enable this,19 and AI is also likely to help  optimise tissue engineering.20

Tissue engineers have worked for decades to develop “scaffolds” on which  tissues can be grown.21 Originally made from synthetics, these are increasingly  made from biological materials such as human collagen,22 biological films23   and decellularised matrices.24 It is vital to understand how the developing  tissues interact with these scaffolds.25

A key challenge is to ensure that implanted cells and tissues do not cause  harm. It is becoming possible to “cloak” the cells by adding and then  overexpressing a set of immune genes, enabling the introduced cells to survive  long-term.26 Another promising precaution is a “safety switch”27 that enables  the cells to be quickly killed if they prove harmful28 — or, preferably, multiple  safety switches for redundancy.29

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Practical engineering  solutions emerge

Researchers identify sets  of rules that determine  cell-fate decisions.  Improved substrates for  tissue culture lead to  more realistic cultured  tissues. AI-based models  of epigenetic gene  regulation enable rational  engineering of the  epigenome.

Reprogramming   comes of age

Cellular and tissue  reprogramming  are achieved at  high efficiency with  larger groups of cells.  Adult tissues are  reprogrammed to  become another tissue  type, enabling organ  repair. Research enables  control of cell division.

Complex circuits and  organs are created

Researchers learn how  to engineer cells into  highly complex circuits  and organs. The human  genome becomes  editable in a systematic,  large-scale fashion,  enabling the creation  of human cells that  perform wholly novel  functions.
<<<END_PAGE_136>>>

<<<PAGE_137>>>
Engineering Human Biology

2.5.2 Organoids

Organoids are clusters of cells that mimic the development of tissues   and organs. They are an increasingly valuable tool for understanding   human development, including the progression of inherited diseases.30  Ultimately, organoids could replace a great deal of animal testing.31

Organoids have been developed for many body systems, including the  intestines,32 kidneys,33 bone marrow,34 cartilage35 and neurons.36 It has also  proved possible to create “gastruloids” that mimic some of the earliest   stages of embryonic development.37 Furthermore, organoids can be used to  simulate the growth of tumours, shedding light on the internal mechanisms  of cancers.38

To create more realistic organoids, it will be necessary to add in more cells   and complex tissues. For example, living organs have a blood supply, which  affects their development and function.39 Researchers are now developing  ways to create vascularised organoids,40 but the next generation may also  need a lymphatic system and other additions.

Ultimately, organoids could be used to create replacement tissues and organs,  serving as an alternative to organ donation. However, at present the culturing  of organoids is inefficient, and it is difficult to upscale them to model more  complex tissues. For clinical purposes, it will be necessary to validate organoids  against “real” tissues or organs, and this is challenging because the necessary  in vitro data is frequently unavailable. One useful benchmark is the Human  Cell Atlas41: however, for testing organoids it would be necessary to create an  atlas showing how cells and tissues change during development.

As a result, organoids are not ready to be widely used clinically.42  Improvements may emerge from integrating organoids with the related field  of organ-on-a-chip,43 and from the use of AI to optimise the construction.44

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Organoids move  beyond the basic

Organoids are created  with blood supplies  and lymphatic systems.  Microfluidic devices  enable multiple  organoids to be  connected and their  interactions studied.

Organ damage is mitigated  with organoid grafts

Organoids are grafted  into existing organs to  repair damage. More  in vivo data enables  organoids to be  validated against real  organs.

Organoids provide new  transplant opportunities

AI-based systems  optimise the maturation  of organoids into  organs. Organoid-based  organ transplants are  performed in humans.

133
<<<END_PAGE_137>>>

<<<PAGE_138>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 134

Engineering Human Biology

Model embryos 2.5.3

Embryo-like structures or “model embryos” can be grown from embryonic  stem cells,45 mimicking the behaviour and physiology of early embryos46

and offering a means to study the earliest stages of the development of  human embryos.47

Many unanswered foundational questions in biology — the mechanisms of cell  differentiation48 and embryo implantation,49 for example — could be answered  through the study of model embryos.50,51

By revealing the processes governing embryonic development, model embryos  could enable the development of treatments for genetic diseases and certain  forms of infertility. Considerable challenges must be overcome if this is to come  to fruition: at present, it is difficult to make model embryos that are both   high-fidelity and controllable.52 Model embryos would also benefit from a  degree of standardisation.53 Digital twins of model embryos may enable us   to improve our methods here.

Model embryos pose challenging ethical and regulatory questions because  they blur the line between cell cultures and human beings. At present,  researchers often deliberately simplify their model embryos: this ensures they  stay within regulations, at the cost of limiting the insights that can be gleaned.  The UK created new rules to guide model embryo research in 2024,54 but  these will surely not be the last word on the matter. It may be necessary to  reconsider legal norms around the beginnings of development55 and to create  distinct regulatory systems for model embryos.56 Such regulations should  also anticipate potential downstream developments, such as growing viable  embryos from stem cells, and even “ectogenesis” ­— growing a human fetus  entirely outside the womb.57

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Improved model embryos  are allowed to develop   for longer

Model embryos  proceed further along  their developmental  trajectory. Improved  culture methods create  more realistic model  embryos.

Model-embryo research  improves IVF outcomes

Model-embryo research  contributes to improved  IVF success rates. Cells  derived from patients  with congenital  conditions are converted  into model embryos,  leading to insights  into the conditions —  including how the first  four weeks of pregnancy  shape long-term health.  Researchers gain a  deeper understanding  of how human  embryogenesis differs  from key model animals  such as mice. Model  embryos of animals  are taken through  to the fetal stage of  development.

Research gives better  pregnancy-related  treatments

Model-embryo  research leads to  improved treatments  for pregnancy- related conditions  such as miscarriage,  endometriosis and  pre-eclampsia. Full  ectogenesis is achieved  in mice. Engineered  model embryos perform  useful functions  and synthesise  desirable molecules.  Researchers achieve  in vitro production of  sperm and egg cells  (gametogenesis) from  adult human cells.
<<<END_PAGE_138>>>

<<<PAGE_139>>>
Engineering Human Biology

2.5.4 Synthetic human genomes

Efforts are now under way to create the first synthetic human genome.   The Wellcome Trust has funded the Synthetic Human Genome Project  (SynHG)58 with the aim of creating a synthetic human chromosome —   a significant fraction of the genome — in the next decade.59 The technology  and workflows developed to achieve this could then be refined to create   an entire genome.

The project builds on previous work to create simpler synthetic genomes,60  beginning with viruses and bacteria,61 and to “upload” these artificial genomes  into living organisms.62 Following early proof-of-concept work, researchers  have begun creating synthetic genomes that are heavily modified from   the originals.63

Synthesising and booting up entire genomes remains challenging, however.64  Consequently, many steps in the workflow will need to be optimised before  a complete human genome is synthesised. Likewise, it will be necessary  to obtain a fuller understanding of the functions of the “natural” human  genome65 if researchers are to safely design a synthetic version.

In parallel with the technical developments, public dialogue and governance  is essential. The public’s expectations will be shaped by early proof-of-concept  research, as will industry interest. Regulators will need to develop new  frameworks to govern synthetic human genomes, especially if they are used  therapeutically or for human enhancement.

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Synthetic human  chromosomes are created

Researchers create a  single watermarked  synthetic human  chromosome and a full  synthetic genome of a  eukaryote — probably  yeast (Saccharomyces).  Advances in creating  synthetic and/or edited  centromeres, regions of  the chromosome that  play a crucial role in  cell division, shed light  on their mechanisms,  which is currently poorly  understood due to their  inaccessibility.

AI improves synthesis

Multiple synthetic  human chromosomes  are created, and  therapies based on  synthetic human  chromosomes are  enabled by AI-enhanced  design. Researchers  gain an improved  understanding of  chromosomal genetic  disorders such as   Turner syndrome,   Down syndrome and  fragile X syndrome.

Creating a synthetic human  genome becomes feasible

The first completely  synthetic human  genome is achieved,  along with the creation  of cells and/or tissues,  based on synthetic  chromosomes, that are  virus-resistant.

135
<<<END_PAGE_139>>>

<<<PAGE_140>>>
HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE

136 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

2.6

Future Therapeutics

CO-CHAIRS:   Michael Lobritz

VP and Global Head of the Infectious Diseases  Therapeutic Area at Roche in Basel, Switzerland

Claire Roddie

Associate Professor in Haemato-Oncology at UCL,  London, UK

CONTRIBUTORS:   James Collins, César de la Fuente,  Dimitri Kullmann

Gene editing and the growing synthetic biology  field promise to change how we conceive of  medical intervention. Instead of fixing things  after they have gone wrong, it is now becoming  conceivable to prevent diseases before birth or  before disease processes manifest.

Engineering the patient’s own cells — through  adding or subtracting genes — can restore functions  that native mutated cells may have lost. This  methodology of using cells that are harvested, edited  and then reimplanted into a patient’s own body has  been the source of many recent breakthroughs.1  The clinical success of using viral vectors and  next‑generation gene-editing platforms for editing  patient cells directly inside the patient (gene  therapy) and editing extracted cells which are then  replaced (cell therapy) opens the door to broader  applications of cell and gene therapies. However,  many challenges remain, for example, gene therapy  is efficient only in certain areas and organs of the  body, and can often be administered only once,  due to the body’s natural immune response to the  viral‑vector delivery system that is used to carry the  DNA to the cells.

Another challenge facing therapeutics are bacterial  and fungal pathogens, which are rapidly becoming  resistant to existing interventions. The World Health  Organization estimates that by 2050 10 million  people will die each year due to antibiotic resistance.2

However, the Identification of potential new classes  of drugs is being vastly accelerated owing to recent  and multiplying advances in artificial intelligence.  Better datasets and better ways of mining them are  set to improve alongside AI tools. Metagenomics is  yielding new discoveries as well, not only identifying  new tricks from existing genomes but also  harvesting strategies from prehistoric species.

Today’s cutting-edge gene and cell therapies are  united in being highly personalised, which accounts  for the tremendous price tag they carry. Bringing  down those costs is the only way to democratise  these treatments, which will require economies   of scale and generalisation.
<<<END_PAGE_140>>>

<<<PAGE_141>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

Genetic and synthetic-biology approaches are  changing our approach to disease treatment and  prevention by providing tools that can operate  at both the symptom level and deeper causal  level. Cell and gene therapy will provide lifelong  corrections to errant biology as well as fixing  defective or missing genes. Research is making  progress in understanding the mechanisms behind  immune‑system regulation and responses, and by  Hacking immunity we can not only restore and  augment the innate balance of the system when it  goes wrong, but also program the system to attack  new, precise targets. Developing new Anti‑infectives  is an urgent goal, given the threat posed by  antimicrobial resistance, with several promising  routes under investigation, including metagenomics  and combinational approaches. All these will be  aided by new approaches to Drug discovery which  exploit technologies such as generative AI and  machine learning for protein synthesis and data  mining to offer the promise of vastly accelerated and  improved pharmaceutical development.

2.6 	 Future Therapeutics

SUB-TOPICS

2.6.1	 Future cell and gene therapy

2.6.2	Hacking immunity

2.6.3	Anti-infectives

2.6.4	Drug discovery

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

Cell and gene therapy and the areas covered  by Hacking immunity are seen as the most  transformative, with survey respondents highly  confident about major advances in the coming five  years. However, work towards the next generation of  Anti-infectives is more uncertain and is not expected  to reach maturity within 15 years. Cell and gene  therapy gets the highest Anticipation Potential score  overall because of the perceived lack of coordinated  international action.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/f-ther

137
<<<END_PAGE_141>>>

<<<PAGE_142>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 138

Future Therapeutics

Cell and gene therapy 2.6.1

Novel gene-editing platforms like base and prime editing,3 and new delivery  methods including lentiviral vectors have treated a wide range of genetic  blood disorders,4 which now opens the door to broader applications of cell  and gene therapies. After the success of mRNA vaccines, other RNA-based  therapies are being explored, including antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs),  which bind to RNA targets, preventing them from producing harmful  proteins, such as those which cause Huntington’s disease in the brain.5

The next frontier is selectivity. The health risks of taking immune cells out   of patients for editing can be avoided with therapies that act directly on  tissues within the body. But these rely on the ability to ferry gene editors  into specific tissues or cells. The most commonly used viral delivery method,  adeno-associated virus (AAV), can reach accessible tissues such as the eyes  and blood, but has more difficulty in penetrating muscle, specific locations  in the brain and solid tumours.6 However, new site-specific gene-editing  methods can infiltrate tumours and preferentially target brain areas linked  to focal epilepsy.7 Engineered immune cells can now contain logic gates that  selectively target leukaemia cells.8 Other disease-sensitive approaches could  target metabolic signatures of diseased cells.

To affordably advance regenerative medicine, immunotherapy and  cancer therapies requires moving from personalised therapies to greater  generalisation.

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Editing gets specific

Gene-transfer  technologies, including  AAV vectors and  lipid nanoparticles,  are repurposed to  deliver epigenetic  effectors. First human  trials begin for gene  therapy that targets  only affected neurons,  treating treatment- resistant epilepsy.9,10  Oligonucleotides are  approved to target  more rare diseases.  Clinical trials on RNA  antisense therapeutics  reveal whether the  therapy can help people  with ALS and other  neurodegenerative  diseases.

Delivery gets specific

First human trials on  gene therapy against  Parkinson’s disease  that targets excitability  in ion channels in  neuronal circuits.11 Non- viral delivery methods  succeed at inserting  payloads into the DNA- containing nucleus  of the cell. Lentiviral  vectors combined with  CRISPR-Cas9 and other  gene-engineering  tools becomes a way to  destroy solid tumours.  The range of clinical  indications for gene  therapies based on  stem cells derived from  bone marrow expands  widely; allogeneic  haematopoietic  stem-cell (HSPC)  transplantation is  phased out in favour of  autologous gene therapy.

Selectivity gets specific and  therapies become general

Glycosylation or other  metabolic markers offer  more specific targets  for immune-cell-based  therapy.12 Pivot towards  editing and delivery  methods that can be  batch-produced for  many patients across  different diseases.  Therapies that use  engineered immune  cells such as CAR-T cells  become standardised.
<<<END_PAGE_142>>>

<<<PAGE_143>>>
Future Therapeutics

2.6.2 Hacking immunity

There has been gradual progress in our understanding of immune  regulatory mechanisms, thanks to the discovery of a diverse range   of immune cells, from anti-inflammatory “brakes” on the system to   pro-inflammatory “accelerators”. The goal for all immune modulation —  whether boosting anti-inflammatory or pro-inflammatory cells, CAR-T   (the modification of immune cells to target cancer cells) or other  manipulation — is re-establishing and supporting the body’s   natural homeostasis.

Immunotherapy (adding specifically curated receptors to the T-cells of the  immune system and others to recognise cancers and other desired targets,  commonly referred to as CAR-T cell therapy) has delivered on its early promise  against cancer. But it remains more effective for cancers like leukaemia,  lymphoma and melanoma than for inaccessible and immunosuppressive solid  tumours. Even for non-solid cancers, CAR-T can fail or induce cytokine toxicity.  Lentiviral vectors, derived from the HIV-1 retrovirus, are showing promise to  deliver gene editors to tumours and against other immune disorders.13,14   Trials are also now beginning for cancer vaccines in England15 and the US.  These work by stimulating a patient’s immune system to recognise and  destroy any remaining cancer cells and stop their reappearance.16

Immunotherapy is not just being investigated for cancer, however. For people  with gene errors predisposing them to immune dysfunction, gene editing  techniques show promise to precisely correct T-cells wrongly targeting  the body’s own healthy cells. CAR techniques being used against multiple  sclerosis17 as well as myasthenia gravis18, stiff person syndrome19 and even  intractable lupus20 are showing promising early results, along with strategies  against other autoimmune disorders.

However, all of this is fighting against symptoms. A future medical approach   to address the underlying cause of immune-system dysregulation will require  a more precise understanding of the triggers for autoimmune disease.

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Understanding the roots   of autoimmune disorders

Clinical trials build  evidence that cancer  vaccines induce an  immune response  that prevents cancer  from returning after  tumour‑removing  surgery. Reduced  immune toxicity makes  CAR-T therapy safer  and more accessible  for patients of all  ages. Results of lupus  immunotherapy trials  deliver new insights  into mechanisms by  which immunotherapy  is resetting the immune  system.

Supercharging  immunomodulation

Synthetic-biology  approaches deprogram  the immune system.  Microfluidic devices,  models used to  recapitulate tumour  complexity, start  to decipher the  molecular mechanisms  driving treatment  inefficiencies and to  evaluate new targeted  immunotherapies.  New treatments are  developed for a rare  disease of the white  blood cells that guard  against repeat infections  and cancer; insights  from this development  inform new research into  the broader immune  system.21 AI starts to  make links between  personal history and  autoimmune disorder  development.

Immune hacking gets local

Therapeutic approaches  scout immunity locally  instead of making  systemic changes:  localised rewiring with  RNA and local delivery  tools like nanoparticles.  This ends systemic side  effects. Precise gene  editing of immune  cells makes it possible  to identify errors in  specific types of cells and  optimise and personalise  treatment for optimal  function of the immune  system. A one-time cure  for HIV that does not  require being on lifelong  medication is developed  using CAR-T cells to  purge the viral reservoir.22  A better understanding  of immune-system  behaviour enables  development of one  global vaccine for cancer.

139
<<<END_PAGE_143>>>

<<<PAGE_144>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 140

Future Therapeutics

Anti-infectives 2.6.3

The widespread use of antibiotics, antivirals and antifungals has driven  the evolution of antimicrobial resistance, set to kill 10 million people a year  by 2050. Besides antimicrobial resistance, other challenges to combating  infectious diseases include, for example, those of tuberculosis, which has  immune tolerance that makes it extremely hard to target with a single  strategy,23 and the chronic fungal infections that immunosuppressed  patients often develop.24 But new drugs are hard to discover and develop,   as they do not make much money competing against cheap generics,   such as current antibiotics on the market.

One such recent candidate, zosurabalpin, overcomes existing antibiotic  resistance mechanisms in a major hospital-acquired pathogen, carbapenem- resistant Acinetobacter baumannii (CRAB), and is now in human trials.  Although AI holds the promise to speed up drug-screening processes, a major  challenge in developing new antibiotic medicines remains the progression of  new chemotypes that kill bacteria effectively in vitro into human medicines  that carry well-balanced drug-like properties, including safety profiles.

It will be necessary to embrace entirely new ideas. First, existing antibiotics may  be made more effective by using them in combination with non-antibiotic  drugs. The use of bacteria-infecting viruses known as phages can treat bacterial  infections and reduce resistance to antibiotics by removing physiological  barriers — biofilms — which contribute to resistance. However, infrastructure  is under-developed for clinical trials, and research is still needed to answer  important questions about the specific actions of phages against bacteria and  how bacteria develop resistance against phages.25 Regulatory infrastructure  also needs to be updated for the research into phages to advance.26 Research  is also under way to develop microbiome strategies to cultivate gut flora  to outcompete pathogenic strains. In addition to faecal transplants, more  sophisticated RNA-based sculpting of the microbiome can selectively kill  certain bacteria.27 Immunotherapy is also being investigated for deployment  against bacterial infections28 and fungus.29 The more alternatives to defeating  antimicrobial resistance the better, to minimise the chance of pathogens  evolving mechanisms to evade the treatment — that is, resistance.

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Diagnostic technologies  improve

Development and  implementation of  diagnostic technologies  that can rapidly identify  infecting pathogens  and which antibiotics  work against a particular  strain allow healthcare  professionals to make  informed decisions about  which antibiotics to use.  Machine-learning models  predict “dual function”  treatments — ways to  kill pathogens while  simultaneously boosting  immune properties.  Phage therapy begins to  be adopted in agriculture  instead of antibiotics to  keep livestock infections  in check.

More therapies   to choose from

How bacteria build  resistance to phages  starts to be understood  and can be modelled  using AI. Gene therapy  begins to be deployed  against pathogenic  bacteria to target their  survival strategies  (including propensity  to form biofilms and/or  transition into “persister”  states). Autologous  prophylactic faecal  transplants become   a routine precursor   to taking antibiotics.  Phage therapies move  into the clinic.

A cure for HIV

Purging the viral  reservoir of HIV creates  a cure that totally  eliminates the disease  in a one-shot cure.  Sustainable chemical- synthesis strategies  are employed to  dramatically reduce the  costs of small-molecule  synthesis, dramatically  reducing time and  cost of delivery of new  medicines.
<<<END_PAGE_144>>>

<<<PAGE_145>>>
Future Therapeutics

2.6.4 Drug discovery

Finding new small-molecule drugs is a multibillion-dollar, multi-year effort  that often fails.30 AI-based drug development promises a faster, more  effective path and has yielded novel drugs, some of which are now entering  trials.31 It is poised to become an increasingly valuable tool.

First, machine learning can identify the complicated lock-and-key  relationships between new compounds and the relevant disease-related  proteins they may affect. AI systems like Google DeepMind’s AlphaFold,  which can predict a protein’s 3D structure from its sequence, are teaming  up with major pharmaceutical companies to hasten the discovery of small- molecule therapeutics.32 AI also holds promise for synthesising new chemical  compounds not seen in nature which bacteria therefore have not had a  chance to build defences against.33

Second, AI can mine the metagenome — the diversity of all existing natural  molecules34 — and beyond; one project is mining the genetic information  of all available extinct organisms, from extinct human relatives such as  Neanderthals to ice-age animals like the woolly mammoth and giant sloth.  These have identified previously employed defence mechanisms, now extinct,  that contemporary pathogens have not evolved to evade.35

Third, machine learning can be deployed to find patterns in other complex  datasets, for example in the heaps of data generated during clinical trials,  whether they succeed or fail.

But AI and machine learning are not magic tools and are useless without good  data. Data generation requires well-curated and standardised public datasets,  and functionalising AI also requires next-generation manufacturing and  regulatory approaches to bring synthesis into line with discovery.

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Aligning humans and   AI in drug discovery

New dataset generation  proposals are developed.  AI begins to mine data  taken during clinical  trials to get a better  look at hidden patterns  related to trial outcomes.  Discovery and proteome  mining speeds up to  identify new candidate  drug compounds in  minutes. Clinical trials  on the first AI-designed  drugs begin to yield  mid-term results.

New frameworks   around AI

Larger data sources are  planned at the nation- state level. AI clinical-trial  data mining links targets  to diseases where no  links had previously been  identified. Frameworks  and new chemical- synthesis systems are  put in place to more  quickly and robustly  turn AI discoveries into  compounds.

AI is a reliable  drug‑discovery partner

AI-mined trial data has  now identified disease  targets as intervenable  nodes and generated  proteins and small  molecules to intervene.  Drug-discovery time  is shortened to days  instead of years.  Sequencing and  synthesis is automated,  reducing costs such  that rare-disease drug  treatments become  viable..

141
<<<END_PAGE_145>>>

<<<PAGE_146>>>
HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE

HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE

85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100

142 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

INVITED CONTRIBUTION

Digital twins

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/dig-twin

Nathan Price

Professor and Co-Director of the Center  for Human Healthspan at the Buck Institute  for Research on Aging, California
<<<END_PAGE_146>>>

<<<PAGE_147>>>
Last year, the Nobel prize for chemistry honoured  the use of AI to predict the structures of proteins.   It was a sign of just how far and fast the technology  is driving progress in that field. Our understanding   of some fundamental questions in biology is  advancing rapidly. The question is, how can   we make similar progress when it comes to the  prevention of disease and the expansion of   good health?

Both parts are important. Disease and sickness  have been the main focus of healthcare, for obvious  reasons. But as the discipline’s very name suggests,   it could and should also focus on the care of health:  on improving our levels of “wellness” and extending  our “healthspan”, the number of years for which we  can expect to enjoy happy and active lives. Some  years ago, my colleague Leroy Hood and I conducted  the first big studies of thousands of people from the  point of view of wellness. We monitored genomes  (the set of genetic material that each of us carries),  proteomes (all the proteins that the genome  encodes) and metabolomes (all the small-molecule  chemicals that a person creates).

Since then, similar efforts have arisen elsewhere,  such as the UK Biobank, the Emirati Genome  Programme in the United Arab Emirates and the  Institute for Healthier Living Abu Dhabi, where   I am an advisor. But right now we don’t have nearly  enough data about how health changes across  a person’s life — and data is the essential input  to AI systems, which could help us to uncover  patterns that are crucial to our good health. With  these systems, you can do a very different style  of data analysis by constructing “digital twins” —  digital models of individuals that monitor the  person’s health trajectory so that they can receive  personalised health programmes.

To that end, my lab is building something I call the  N of 1 Analyzer, “n” being the abbreviation in statistics  for “sample size” — so the name means that it’s  analysing just one person, not the large numbers  more typical of scientific studies. The point of the  N of 1 Analyzer is to discover how much I can say  about an individual’s health and the treatments  likely to help them most, based on individual  measurements — something that has not been  doable to any great extent until now. It will do this   by using AI to do “deep reasoning” on the details   of what’s going on in a person’s body.

What is deep reasoning? Historically, we have  used statistics to study biological information or  to discover biological markers for disease. With AI,  however, we can go further, and exploit everything  we know about what we’re measuring, not just  the measured data itself. Large language models  can interpret our knowledge about what a protein,  metabolite or gene does in the body, and this can  be combined with the results of statistical analyses  of proteomes, metabolomes, epigenomes and  genomes. This context-aware data analysis is what   I call deep reasoning and unlocks profound new  ways of looking at health.

143
<<<END_PAGE_147>>>

<<<PAGE_148>>>
HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SCIENCE

144 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Consider how it changes the way we think about  biomarkers, one of the central concepts in modern  medicine. As soon as I start looking for a biomarker  for a disease, I’ve made a huge assumption:   I’ve assumed that the disease always follows   a trajectory where the biomarker is involved.   But diseases can actually follow a variety of  trajectories, and unless these are being monitored,  it’s not clear what they look like. With deep  reasoning, the large language model has context  about disease processes that it draws from countless  scientific papers, which it can use to reason about  the changes that a particular individual is showing.  Result: real personalised medicine.

Or consider gene variants that give you high or low  risk for a disease. Let’s take as an example the gene  APOE, whose variant APOE4 gives you high risk for  Alzheimer’s, whereas APOE2 gives you low risk.   But this difference only manifests in later life —  around your late sixties. Then, people with the  APOE4 variant can struggle to remember their  children, while those with APOE2 are fine. Why?   My favoured explanation is that it’s because the  APOE gene ultimately dictates how fast cholesterol  is transported out of certain brain cells. If the rate   of transport is slow, as it is in people with APOE4,  your neurons will die when short of oxygen — and  your ability to supply oxygen to your brain declines  as you get older.1 So now we have a mechanism that  explains why APOE4 matters when you’re older but  not when you’re young.

If that is indeed the mechanism, I can use that  information to understand my personal resilience  to the threat of Alzheimer’s and to take protective  measures. For instance, among people who use  saunas four to seven times a week the rate of  dementia drops by 65 per cent2 and the rate of  cardiovascular disease by 50 per cent.3 The same   is true for other conditions. For diabetes, for example,  you would want to check three things that are  involved in the early stages of the disease: how well  your beta cells are working, how well you control  glucose levels and where in your body you are  depositing fat.

There are limitations to this digital-twin approach.  Any model of a real system is an approximation.  We will not be able to be able to represent the full  complexity of human biology any time soon: there’s  still an incredible amount that is unknown. There’s  also a whole philosophical discussion as to the ways  in which the analysis amounts to actual “reasoning”.  I think it’s not — it’s actually an approximation based  on human language — but the salient point is that  it provides different, potentially complementary  insights to a statistical average.

Looking ahead, there is an opportunity to develop   a new kind of science based on data from digital  twins. To date, most personalised medicine has  catered to the rich, who can afford the extensive  physical testing needed to build up personalised  data. But there are now comparatively cheap ways   to get personalised data. Large language models can  set up personalised systems without the need for  physical testing, and we can push AI hallucinations  in this space to near zero. You can tell the system  about yourself — and we can put privacy safeguards  in place so that information remains with you and  doesn’t go elsewhere — and get advice about,  for instance, insomnia: what could help me sleep  better? How important is it? Should I worry about it?  Or, my grandpa suffered from Alzheimer’s: should   I worry about that?

A good next step might be to focus on densely  phenotyping a million people — that is, recording  their detailed individual characteristics — and taking  measurements every few months so that we can  understand the trajectories of diseases. Over the  next year or so my group will be working with various  groups at that scale, although not yet gathering  all the deep, longitudinal information that’s  theoretically available. But that can still be valuable.  Under a project called Personalized Analytics for  Transforming Health Care (PATH) from the US  Advanced Research Project Agency for Health,  monitoring people with diabetes has revealed that  there are maybe three dominant paths in there.  That’s a fundamental and significant feature that   we didn’t understand before.
<<<END_PAGE_148>>>

<<<PAGE_149>>>
Making that knowledge more widely useable need  not be expensive: perhaps using home testing kits  based around disposable paper-based devices and  mobile phones. Some biomarkers may correlate  reliably with a feature that can be measured by  phone — a measurement or statistical analysis of  features on a face, say. As people become used to  such tracking, and more appreciative of its value,  they will derive more and more benefit from it —   and so will researchers, since that means they will  have access to the long-term datasets needed to  take the next leap with healthcare AI systems.

A decade from now, we can anticipate that on  the one hand there will be huge amounts of data  streaming in from people taking charge of their  own wellness, and on the other huge amounts of  information about fundamental processes and  mechanisms unearthed by automated experimental  systems. Governments should understand these  opportunities, because few other entities have the  funding and staying power that it will take to do  this work. Already the UK, the United Arab Emirates,  China and, to a limited degree, the US are putting  money into this area. There’s a race on right now,  an important one, to develop tools to realise the  potential in a big way — and ensure that healthcare  really does come to mean taking care of health.

145
<<<END_PAGE_149>>>

<<<PAGE_150>>>
PULSE OF DIPLOMACY HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF DIPLOMACY HUMAN AUGMENTATION

146 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS

Unlocking next-generation  neurotechnology applications

2.1	 Cognitive Engancement

As advancements in neuroscience and   brain-machine interface technologies accelerate,  the potential for groundbreaking applications   in healthcare, communication, and beyond   is immense.

How can academics, biotech companies, and  regulatory bodies collaborate to ensure that the  benefits of neurotechnologies become widely  accessible while safeguarding individual rights?

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-PD-2-1

PARTICIPANTS

Moderated by:

Presentation:

With:

Lynn Hanessian

Chief Strategist at Edelman, a global public  relations consultancy.

Friedhelm Hummel

MD, Director of the Defitech Chair of Clinical  Neuroengineering at the Neuro-X Institute at  EPFL, the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology  in Lausanne.

Ariel Garten

Founder and Chief Evangelist Officer at Muse,  a start-up aimed at revolutionising brain health  through technology.

Jennifer French

Executive Director at Neurotech Network, a non- profit organisation that focuses on education and  advocacy of neurotechnologies.

Ioannis Ghikas

Ambassador and Permanent Representative at the  Permanent Mission of Greece to the UN in Geneva.

Amy Kruse

General Partner and Chief Investment Officer at  Satori Neuro, a venture fund focused on mental  health, neurotechnology and human flourishing.

Hilal Lashuel

Research, Development and Innovation Advisor  to the Chairperson, and Executive Director, RDI,  at Qatar Foundation, a not-for-profit organisation  focused on education, research, innovation and  community development.

TAKEAWAY MESSAGES

“Neurotechnology can enable  personalised treatments  for brain disorders without  surgery.”

“The biomarker and health data  that wearable tech can gather  will allow us to treat diseases   such as Parkinson’s and  Alzheimer’s at their earliest  stages.”

“We must build in equity  and inclusion early in the  development of a new  neurotechnology.”

“We need an international  regime to protect citizens from  the misuse of neurotechnology.”
<<<END_PAGE_150>>>

<<<PAGE_151>>>
147
<<<END_PAGE_151>>>

<<<PAGE_152>>>
PULSE OF IMPACT HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF IMPACT HUMAN AUGMENTATION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 148

Media-innovation analysis

Within the context of Human Augmentation,  Healthspan Extension remains the topic  most covered by the media, corresponding  to a relatively high level of scientific output.  Cognitive Enhancement, by contrast, while  still prolific in terms of scientific advancements,  is receiving much less media coverage.

LEGEND:

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/2-impact

YoY PATENT GROWTH  YoY growth of topic mentions  from May 2023-April 2024 to  May 2024-April 2025

YoY MEDIA GROWTH  YoY growth of granted topic  patents from May 2023-April  2024 to May 2024-April 2025.

LOW HIGH

YoY PATENT GROWTH2

2.1 Cognitive Enhancement 2.3 Healthspan Extension

2.4 Future of Consciousness

2.5 Engineering Human Biology

2.2 Cell and Gene Engineering

LOW YoY MEDIA GROWTH1

2.6 Future Therapeutics

MEDIA-INNOVATION MATRIX

HIGH
<<<END_PAGE_152>>>

<<<PAGE_153>>>
CUMULATIVE INVESTMENT IN COGNITIVE-ENHANCEMENT COMPANIES

CUMULATIVE INVESTMENT (MILLIONS USD)

25000

20000

15000

10000

5000

0

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

NUMBER OF NEW INVESTMENTS IN COGNITIVE-ENHANCEMENT COMPANIES

NUMBER OF INVESTMENTS

300

200

100

0

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

NUMBER OF NEWLY FOUNDED COGNITIVE-ENHANCEMENT COMPANIES

NUMBER OF NEWLY FOUNDED COMPANIES

0 20 40 60 80 100

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

IMPACT FOCUS

Investment and  company creation in  Cognitive Enhancement

2.1

Recent technological advances in electronic  miniaturisation, brain-signal detection and AI for  data analysis have boosted neuroscience and  neurotechnology development, generating large  financial investments from the public and private  sectors. The yearly investments in neurotech  companies have reached $2 billion in 2021: a 40-fold  increase since the early 2000s. The yearly number of  investments has followed a similar trend, reaching  300 per year in 2021.

Source, facing page: Deep View analysis from 1 May 2022-

30 April 2024; (1) YoY media growth = YoY growth of topic

mentions from May 2022/April 2023 to May 2023/April 2024;

(2) YoY patent growth = YoY growth of granted topic patents

from May 2022-April 2023 to May 2023-April 2024.

Source, this page: Pitchbook

*Data on newly-founded companies in 2023 is incomplete and

will be updated once first funding is raised. Projections indicate

a minimum of similar levels of company creation to 2021.

149
<<<END_PAGE_153>>>

<<<PAGE_154>>>
HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SOCIETY HUMAN AUGMENTATION PULSE OF SOCIETY

150 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

What do people say?  An analysis of mainstream media articles,  blog posts and scientific articles over a  period of 12 months shows that, while  Human Augmentation sees rising optimism  globally, driven by innovation in healthcare  and longevity, ethical concerns and health  risks temper views in many regions.  Discourse in media articles and social media  posts are primarily driven by individuals  in academic settings and heavily focused  on developed economies, indicating the  relevance of Human Augmentation for  more affluent populations.

MAINSTREAM MEDIA SENTIMENT

74% 74% 77% 19%

Positive          Neutral          Negative

MAINSTREAM MEDIA 1 May 2024 - 30 April 2025

UNIQUE ARTICLES

VISUALISED ARTICLES

NET SENTIMENT

ARTICLE UNIQUENESS

1 May 2024 - 30 April 2025 SOCIAL MEDIA

NUMBER OF POSTS

VISUALISED POSTS

NET SENTIMENT

UNIQUE IMPRESSIONS

533k

5.9k

90% 65%

3.344k

9.1k

48% 231b

Alzheimer Drug Discovery

Therapy Pipeline Research Report  AI based Next-Gen Drug Discovery

Nexstim Nbs System

Humacyte

Blind Children

Ophthalmology Advancements

Innovative Cancer Therapy Strategies

Peptide Synthesis

Deaf Children

Musk Neuralink

Brain Implant Diabetes Treatment

Rex Grant

Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy

Diets, Walks and Exercise

India Drug Discovery

Smart Mouthguards and Anti Ageing Lights

Cell Therapy

NAD Supplements

Gene Therapy

Body Development Strategies

Creative Biolabs

Anti-Ageing Serum

Robotics In Surgery Biotech & Pharma Innovative Manufacturing

Innovative Surgery Methodology

Regenerative Medicine

Organogenesis Holdings

Vetstem Cell Therapy
<<<END_PAGE_154>>>

<<<PAGE_155>>>
DEMOGRAPHICS & SENTIMENT PER REGION

North America

61% 25% 15%

+ Drug Development

+ Gene Therapy

+ Health

GLOBAL SENTIMENT

•	Sentiment around Human Augmentation remains broadly positive, driven  by optimism in healthcare innovations, wellness initiatives and gene-therapy  developments aimed at enhancing longevity and quality of life.

•	While MENA continues to show strong enthusiasm — especially Turkey (64%) —  more developed regions like North America, Europe and Oceania adopt a  more cautious stance, highlighting concerns over safety, cost and ethics in  experimental treatments and genetic research.

•	Brain-chip technology, medicinal plant applications and high-cost drug  approvals receive neutral sentiment as discussions weigh innovation against  risks and economic factors.

- Development

- Disease

- Cancer

Latin America

65% 24% 11% 66% 19% 16%

+ Drug Development

+ Stem Cell Therapy

+ Innovation

- Autoimmune

- Diseases

- Cancer

Europe

66% 23% 11%

+ Cancer Treatment

+ Drug Discovery

+ Technology

Africa

+ Drug Development

+ Health

+ Research

- High Costs

- Autoimmune

- Cancer

- Sickle Cell

- Death

- Risk

•	Negative sentiment is fuelled by disease outbreaks, experimental treatment  risks and ethical concerns tied to genetic research, which remain key barriers to  wider public acceptance.

•	Geographically, North America’s conversation is dominated by the US (93%),  while Latin America is led by Mexico (33%) and Peru (23%). In Europe, the UK  (43%) and Germany (17%) take the lead. India drives discourse in Asia (60%),  Nigeria (35%) and South Africa (26%) in Africa, and Australia (85%) in Oceania.

Source: Deep View social media analysis from 1 May 2024 to 30 April 2025. Note: English-language social

media postings; reposts were excluded from the analysis.

MENA

+ Stem Cell

+ Technology

+ Innovation

69% 22% 9%

- Diseases

- Risk

- Cancer

Russia & Asia

70% 21% 9%

+ Drug Development

- Costs

+ Regenerative

- Chronic Illness

+ Stem Cell

- Diseases

Oceania

62% 17% 21%

+ Longevity

- Profit from Fail

- Exploit

+ Stem cell

- Risk

+ Regenerative

151
<<<END_PAGE_155>>>

<<<PAGE_156>>>
PULSE OF SOCIETY HUMAN AUGMENTATION

PULSE OF SOCIETY HUMAN AUGMENTATION

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 152

Media analysis

KEY TAKEAWAYS    Public interest in human potential technologies  is cooling, with slowed or negative growth across  cognition, consciousness and genetic enhancement.  However, interest in Healthspan Extension remains  strong, growing by 6% to 259,000 articles in 2025 —  still one of the largest emerging health topics. In  contrast, public attention to Future Therapeutics  fell sharply by 21%, following several years of growth,  with the dominant sub-topic of Drug discovery  declining by 23%.

The overarching sentiment surrounding Human  Augmentation is positive. However, there has  been significant net sentiment decline from 2024  to 2025, particularly in areas such as Cognitive  Enhancement and Cell and Gene Engineering.

Cognitive Enhancement saw the sharpest decline  in net sentiment, reflecting growing societal  unease around its ethical and psychological  implications — despite past enthusiasm. Cell and  Gene Engineering also dropped, indicating rising  public concerns over the rapid integration of AI and  synthetic biology in genetic interventions.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/2-society

SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM

MAINSTREAM MEDIA GROWTH

MAINSTREAM MEDIA DOMINANCE

SOCIAL  MEDIA SENTIMENT

Human Augmentation

-1.6%  Human Augmentation

DOMINANCE UNIQUE ARTICLES

533k

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

60% 27%

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

62% 16%

EMERGING  TOPICS

2.1 Cognitive  Enhancement

15%  Fundamentals of cognition

-4%  Neuromodulation systems

3%  Cognitive Enhancement

-29%  Exogenous cognition

-3%  Decrypting the brain

1

2 3

4

1 4

48k 2

3

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

73% 16%

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

61% 11%
<<<END_PAGE_156>>>

<<<PAGE_157>>>
2.5 Engineering Human  Biology 2.4 Future of  Consciousness 2.3 Healthspan Extension 2.2 Cell and Gene  Engineering

2.6 Future Therapeutics

-8%  Cellular (re-)programming and tissue development

-7%  Engineered organisms and AI-based tools

-26%  Modulation of human consciousness

-10%  Next-generation editors and delivery

17%  Rejuvenating the epigenome

-9%  Alternatives to direct gene editing

-14%  Beyond-human consciousness

18%  Biomarkers of ageing

-41%  Synthetic human genomes

-5%  Engineering Human Biology

6%  Non-human consciousness -6%  Human consciousness

-11%  Cell and Gene Engineering

-2%  Future of Consciousness

6%  Healthspan Extension

-18%  Cell and gene therapy

2%  Lifestyle modification 17%  Dark genome

-21%  Future Therapeutics

-14%  Hacking immunity

-23%  Drug discovery

1%  Model embryos  -10%  Organoids

2%  Anti-infectives

0%  Diagnostics

1 2 3 4

3

2

3

1 2 3 4

1

4

1 2

4

1 2

3

4

DOMINANCE DOMINANCE DOMINANCE DOMINANCE DOMINANCE

1

4

1

1

4

1

4

2

3

2

141k

13k

59k

259k

14k

1

2 3

3

3

2

4

4

2

3

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

49% 35%

63% 23%

42% 38%

58% 31%

67% 23%

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

54% 15%

64% 14%

52% 15%

63% 25%

68% 19%

153
<<<END_PAGE_157>>>

<<<PAGE_158>>>
PLATFORM INTRODUCTION ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PLATFORM INTRODUCTION ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

154

SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM

SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM

SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM

SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM

SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM

SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM

SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM

5

3

3

3

5

3

Eco-Regeneration  & Geoengineering

Eco-Regeneration  & Geoengineering

Humanity’s relationship with its physical  environment faces clear challenges related   to energy and food production, climate and  ecological trends, and the emergence of novel  threats to human health. However, advances in  science and technology are helping to map the  extent of these challenges, and to create pathways  towards solutions. In addition, the off-Earth orbital  environment is becoming increasingly accessible  and potentially useful, expanding the scope of  humanity’s resources, progress and opportunities.   In this section, we explore the research that is  leading to discoveries that could be transformative  for all our futures.

Humanity’s relationship with its physical  environment faces clear challenges related   to energy and food production, climate and  ecological trends, and the emergence of novel  threats to human health. However, advances in  science and technology are helping to map the  extent of these challenges, and to create pathways  towards solutions. In addition, the off-Earth orbital  environment is becoming increasingly accessible  and potentially useful, expanding the scope of  humanity’s resources, progress and opportunities.   In this section, we explore the research that is  leading to discoveries that could be transformative  for all our futures.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®
<<<END_PAGE_158>>>

<<<PAGE_159>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE (pages 154–195)

Containing deep insights into anticipated advances  in Eco-Regeneration & Geoengineering over the  next 5, 10 and 25 years, the GESDA Pulse of Science  provides the expert opinions of leading researchers  across the fields of energy engineering, ecology,  future food systems, orbital environment, ocean  science and pathogen biology.

PULSE OF DIPLOMACY (pages 196–201)

The GESDA Pulse of Diplomacy captures the latest  discussions between diplomats and scientists at the  2024 Geneva Science and Diplomacy Anticipation  Summit, such as pandemic preparedness, resilient  farming, ocean governance and the orbital  environment.

PULSE OF IMPACT (pages 202–203)

Current investment trends and dynamics of  company creation highlight future food systems  as an increasingly important topic. The GESDA  Pulse of Impact provides data detailing  private‑sector investment, intellectual‑property  activity and company creation in the area of future  food systems since 2000.

PULSE OF SOCIETY (pages 204–207)

Powered by AI, the GESDA Pulse of Society’s network  and dynamic sentiment analysis of both mainstream  and social media reveals macro- and micro-trends in  public opinion around the world on topics relating   to Eco-Regeneration & Geoengineering.

155
<<<END_PAGE_159>>>

<<<PAGE_160>>>
ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF SCIENCE

ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF SCIENCE

156 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

3.1

Energy Engineering

CHAIR:   Mercedes Maroto-Valer

Robert Buchan Chair in Sustainable Energy  Engineering and Director of the Research Centre   for Carbon Solutions at Heriot-Watt University   in Edinburgh, UK

CONTRIBUTORS:   Antonello Monti, Sanjib Kumar Panda,  Robin Mutschler, Tobias Schmidt,  Georgios Mavromatidis, Daniel Kammen,  Mark Sutton, Anna Korre

The global energy landscape is on the cusp of   a profound transformation, driven by the urgent  need to mitigate climate change and to build   a more sustainable and equitable future.  The current system is characterised by siloed  infrastructure and a deep-seated reliance on fossil  fuels, and faces mounting pressure from innovative,  cleaner alternatives. However, significant barriers  must be overcome, from policy biases and financial  subsidies for incumbents to questions of social  justice and infrastructure design.

One important challenge is determining where to  pursue smart and large-scale energy infrastructure,  where to enable smart, decentralised systems that  facilitate the operation of smaller, more resilient  facilities and how to find the right combination of  centralised and distributed systems. In designing  these future systems, it will be important to dismantle  the energy inequalities embedded in our current  fossil-fuel-based world and to put measures in  place that ensure that they do not re-emerge.  It is likely that this will involve a transition from  rigid electromechanical grids to programmable,  data‑driven networks. This too will require careful  design that balances decentralised, bottom‑up  microgrids against large-scale, networked  systems — and integrates the benefits of AI without  compromising data security or introducing weakness  into our critical infrastructure.

Equally important is the decarbonisation of our  energy systems, including challenging sectors such  as aviation and shipping. There is reason for optimism  here: innovations in chemical engineering are  helping the energy sector move towards alternative,  low‑carbon fuels and capturing carbon from existing  and future fossil‑fuel-burning energy sources. Primary  obstacles include the need for more efficient catalysts,  scalable sources of renewable feedstocks and the  high costs that make direct air capture (DAC) of  carbon dioxide a competing and complementary  technology. Broader environmental and sustainability  considerations will require significant economic and  societal changes: it is likely that only blunt policy  instruments and mindset shifts will align our energy  use with planetary boundaries and enable us to  achieve long-term environmental goals. International  funding, cooperation and regulation mechanisms  could accelerate adoption of such measures.
<<<END_PAGE_160>>>

<<<PAGE_161>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

Energy production and delivery systems need to  undergo a profound transformation if we are to meet  both our energy needs and climate and sustainability  goals. One important innovation will be an Integrated  energy sector, where thermal, fuel-based and  electrical energy systems interoperate. Electrical  grids will also require new infrastructure that can  make the most of Digital energy innovations and the  transformative potential of AI to optimise complex  new energy flows. Alternative sustainable fuels  and chemicals are set to play a significant role in  decarbonising energy systems. The science behind  creating synthetic fuels from captured carbon dioxide  is not yet fully understood and yet is a vital pathway  for decarbonising sectors like aviation and shipping.  Ecological sustainability and the health of people and  the planet demands that the largest change must be  to fully Coupling energy and environment, which will  require significant economic and societal shifts for   a successful and timely transition.

3.1 	 Energy Engineering

SUB-TOPICS

3.1.1	 Integrated energy

3.1.2	 Digital energy innovations

3.1.3	 Alternative sustainable   fuels and chemicals

3.1.4	 Coupling energy   and environment

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

The ongoing integration of Digital energy  innovations into energy systems will have major  transformative effects on the economy and society.  While road maps leading to the developments  of Alternative sustainable fuels and chemicals  are relatively clear, major breakthroughs are still  a decade away. Efficient ways of Coupling energy  and environment remain a challenge but could be  highly impactful in the future. Awareness and calls  for multilateral action remains high for all four topics  within Energy Engineering.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/en-eng

157
<<<END_PAGE_161>>>

<<<PAGE_162>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

PULSE OF SCIENCE

ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

158

Energy Engineering

3.1.1 Integrated energy

Our energy infrastructure is currently designed to supply three vastly  different types of demand: heating and cooling technology; transport and  industry; and electrically powered apparatus and infrastructure ranging  from washing machines to data centres. This has led to a siloed approach  which leaves ample opportunity for convergence towards lower-carbon  alternatives.

This energy transition is already under way. Clean power is now 40 per cent   of global electricity production and the amount of solar power is doubling  every three years.1 For several years now, it has generally been cheaper to  build a new clean-energy power plant (with storage) than it is to operate  an existing fossil-fuel power plant.2 But properly modelling and operating  energy systems that integrate systems for electricity, fuel and heat requires  significant advances. These include high-resolution computer models that  capture complex behaviour, control systems optimised by machine learning,  standardised communication protocols so that key components can integrate  into decentralised systems and advanced cybersecurity to secure energy  networks against attack. The scale of these systems must also increase so  that energy can flow smoothly across borders, entire regions and potentially  globally. This scaling will require advances in modelling, analysis and  prediction enabled by advances in AI and quantum computing.

Non-technical barriers, such as legal incompatibilities across regions,  socio‑political resistance and skills gaps, are also beginning to weigh more  heavily than technical ones. For example, global energy policies are heavily  biased towards fossil fuels, which are currently subsidised to the tune of up   to $7 trillion a year compared to the $1.2 trillion invested in clean energy.  Ensuring equal access to clean energy is also a growing concern, given the  initial cost of acquiring the infrastructure to deliver it. Ensuring that all people  can benefit from the outset is an important task.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Integrated energy systems  begin to emerge

Integrated energy  systems, with shared  infrastructure and  interoperable AI-driven  optimisation and control  systems, begin to  benefit from advanced  control approaches  using machine learning.  Decentralised control   also optimises the  exchange of energy across  different sectors while  minimising losses.

International energy   flows accelerate

Efficient energy flows  across borders and  regions become  widespread thanks to  a silo-free integrated  energy system and  agile programmable  devices that make the  best use of the available  infrastructure.

Energy systems managed  on a global scale

Computational advances  in AI and quantum  computing allow  energy systems to be  simulated and managed  dynamically on a global  scale. This leads to a  seamlessly integrated  energy system across  geographies that can  operate autonomously.  Space-based solar- harvesting technologies  send energy to Earth for  the first time. However,  hundreds of millions still  do not have access to  electricity.
<<<END_PAGE_162>>>

<<<PAGE_163>>>
Energy Engineering

3.1.2 Digital energy innovations

Energy systems are changing from rigid, electromechanical structures   to programmable, data-driven networks. This transition has increased the  complexity of operations and raised issues of stability and vulnerability  to hackers, but also presents an opportunity to dramatically increase the  efficiency of the energy infrastructure while reducing its carbon footprint.3  This will require the adoption of entirely new operational principles drawing  inspiration from modern communication networks and the resilience they  offer. The result should be a more flexible, integrated and democratised  energy landscape.

Just how these new energy grids will evolve is an open question. One option is  the development of decentralised, bottom-up systems, or “microgrids”,4 which  are more adaptable and can be aggregated over time. Proponents argue that  they offer a more modular and resilient form of connectivity. The alternative is  large, integrated and networked systems that benefit from economies of scale  and encourage resource-sharing. In many parts of the world, these will continue  to be favoured.

Both will require sophisticated models that can simulate complex behaviour,  control multifaceted systems and predict future outputs. These “digital twins”   are evolving rapidly, enabled by the analysis of large datasets and AI.

However, significant barriers still prevent wider implementation, including the  inaccessibility of data for security reasons and a reluctance to test AI in critical  infrastructure where failures are unacceptable. Building trust in AI and ensuring  it is understandable and safe through “explainability” initiatives or insistence on  “human-in-the-loop” protocols are major challenges.

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

The emergence of   pico- and nano-grids

The rise of local,  decentralised systems  such as ultra-small-scale  pico- and nano-grids  at the building level  begins to showcase their  advantages.

The scaling challenge  focuses attention

Aggregating local  decentralised networks  into larger grids — from  the university campus  scale to the city scale,  for instance — becomes  a key challenge for the  clean energy transition.

The first fully integrated,  bottom-up energy system

By linking smaller,  decentralised grids,  entire cities and even  countries become  fully transformed into  bottom-up clean energy  systems that have the  potential to achieve  net‑zero goals.

159
<<<END_PAGE_163>>>

<<<PAGE_164>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

PULSE OF SCIENCE

ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

160

Energy Engineering

3.1.3 Alternative sustainable  fuels and chemicals

Chemists have long understood how to turn carbon dioxide into fuel, via  hydrogenation using the Sabatier process5 to make methane, for example.  The Fischer-Tropsch process, meanwhile, can convert6 carbon monoxide and  hydrogen into liquid hydrocarbons. However, these processes are inefficient,  energy-intensive and expensive ways of producing fuels when starting from  sustainable ingredients rather than fossil fuels.

Much research is currently devoted to developing alternative sustainable  fuels and chemicals, improving understanding of the reaction mechanisms  and developing better catalysts that can lower energy costs, increase yields  and reduce the need for scarce or controversial materials like cobalt and  ruthenium. More efficient reactions will improve the viability of “power-to-X”  technologies that convert renewable energy into fuels like methane or other  hydrocarbons as a form of energy storage, although life‑cycle assessment  protocols will be required to ensure that synthetic fuels really do have net  climate benefits.

Beyond the challenge of developing better materials and processes is  the problem of finding scalable, renewable sources of carbon dioxide and  hydrogen to act as feedstocks, should these fuels be produced on a vast scale.  Biogenic sources of carbon are generally limited and, in some cases, may  compete with crops and agriculture. Other sources, like direct air capture  (DAC), raise massive engineering challenges. Methane pyrolysis and ammonia  cracking are looking like promising routes to producing hydrogen. There  remains the problem of integrating these new fuels into a processing, refining  and distribution system designed for fossil fuels.

In the meantime, the high cost of synthetic fuels raises the question of  where to use them, with aviation and international shipping being likely  candidates.7 Indeed, the costs of synthetic fuels are so high that it is currently  cheaper to continue burning fossil fuels and then remove the carbon dioxide  this produces from the atmosphere with DAC.8 This is unlikely to change  soon but could bootstrap DAC technology to the point where it can capture  carbon‑dioxide feedstocks on a scale suitable for manufacturing synthetic  fuels at a more reasonable price.9

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Electrochemistry unearths  novel materials and  processes

A continued focus on  better understanding  the electrochemistry in  making synthetic fuels  leads to a new generation  of more efficient and   more stable materials   and processes.

Direct air capture  investment soars

As alternative fuels  are adopted by larger  markets, the demand  for sustainably sourced  carbon dioxide soars,  triggering greater  investment in direct air  capture technology.

Sustainable aviation fuel  policy generates demand  for synthetics

The European Union  mandates that  70 per cent of aviation  fuel must be sustainable  by 2050, with at least half  of that being synthetic  fuel. This drives research  innovations, seeding new  breakthroughs.

Climeworks direct air capture plant   to sky image is © Climework,   Image by Julia Dunlop
<<<END_PAGE_164>>>

<<<PAGE_165>>>
Energy Engineering

3.1.4 Coupling energy and environment

Understanding the way human energy use is coupled to the environment  involves dealing with the complex interplay between land, air and ocean  systems. Reducing humans’ energy-related impact on the environment   is also complex, involving social, economic and political forces.

Economic incentives could help, given their role in past environmental progress  such as reducing sulphur-dioxide emissions by switching from coal-burning to  gas. In the same way, future transitions will mean creating opportunities for large  industries to invest in new technologies that reduce environmental impacts.

One important issue is the role of consumption. Even with cleaner technology,  emissions continue to increase because overall activity increases. One reason  for this is that our economic models do not account for the true environmental  cost of extracting and consuming natural resources. Finding ways to model and  control consumption, perhaps with “environmental allowances”, will be essential.

Beyond that, the switch to a circular economy will require a mindset shift,10  focusing on recovering resources rather than just reducing pollution.   This includes, for example, turning waste into fertiliser and developing devices   to recover nitrogen from emissions for reuse,11 plus reuse of solar-panel materials,  recovery of lithium and the development of industrial symbiosis projects.

Crucial to these goals is the recognition of the inescapable coupling between  energy generation and the environment. Achieving our 2050 environmental  goals will require immediate action, but shorter-term goals look increasingly  unachievable. Without urgent action at every scale of society, there is a  significant chance that many of the UN’s 2030 Sustainable Development Goals  will not be met.

10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Short-term goals unmet

Many of the UN’s  2030 Sustainable  Development Goals   are not achieved.

Mid-term goals   are more realistic

An integrated  understanding of  science, engineering   and economics will   help policy‑makers  optimise geopolitical  processes and risks  across global scales.

With immediate  widespread action, long- term goals are achievable

Environmental  allowances, similar  to a carbon tax, lead  to dramatic falls in  consumption and the  use of natural resources.  This raises hope that 2050  environmental targets  can be achieved.

161
<<<END_PAGE_165>>>

<<<PAGE_166>>>
ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF SCIENCE ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF SCIENCE

162 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

3.2

Ecology

CHAIR:   Sandra Díaz

Professor of Ecology at the National University   of Córdoba, Argentina

CONTRIBUTORS:   Alexander Bailey, Jeannine Cavender-Bares,  George Christophides, Kiyoko Gotanda,  Paul Leadley, Yadvinder Malhi, Angela Moles,  Laura Pereira, Andy Purvis, David Cooper,  Berta Martín-López, Javier Nori, Mercedes  Bustamante, Osvaldo E. Sala, Benjamin Halpern,  Enrique Martínez-Meyer, Laura Yahdjian

Ecosystems are utterly essential to human survival  and success, providing everything from clean  water and food to homes and well-being. Yet life  on Earth faces multiple threats, from infrastructure  encroachment, pollution and over-exploitation to  climate change.1 These factors are accelerating and  expanding in scale, often originating very far from  the impacted places. Consequently, it is essential to  improve our understanding of how ecosystems are  changing in order to build a future where humans  and nonhuman life thrive.

The IUCN Red List has identified 47,000 species as  threatened by extinction,2 including 44 per cent  of reef-building corals, 12 per cent of birds and  71 per cent of cycads.3 Assessments of ecosystem  health began more recently and are less complete,  but in the US, 41 per cent of ecosystems are  estimated to be at risk of collapse4 and a fifth of  countries are at risk from ecosystem collapse.5

The impacts of climate change are already being  felt and are predicted to accelerate. As soon as 2070,  33 per cent of land will see significant changes in  the types of plants that can survive — and that is  assuming drastic cuts in greenhouse-gas emissions.6  The biosphere is changing around us, largely  because of us.

Steps are being taken to avert the worst impacts.  Governments agreed in 2022 to establish protected  areas covering 30 per cent of Earth’s land and  sea area by 2030.7 It remains to be seen whether  and how this will actually be enacted. As of 2024,  just 17.6 per cent of land and inland waters and  8.4 per cent of the ocean and coastal areas are within  protected areas.8

Massive increases in the volume and diversity  of ecological data are providing ever-greater  understanding of the ecological changes that  are occurring and of the processes that underpin  them. This should enable us to predict dangerous  ecological transitions and take steps to avert them,  and to design more effective and fair conservation  and sustainable-use actions. Some interventions may  involve novel high-tech solutions such as genetic  modification. However, all will require an appreciation  of the role of human cultures in ecosystems9  and a wide discussion of the ethical and political  implications well beyond the technical aspects.10,11,12
<<<END_PAGE_166>>>

<<<PAGE_167>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

Ecosystems are essential to our survival and   well-being, but many are transforming fast   as a result of human activities. In a world of  Ecosystems in rapid transition, it is essential to  develop new methods and models to understand  them, and to devise improved ethical guidance for  how to manage them. Fortunately, ecology is seeing  unprecedented Innovations in data-gathering,  including a multitude of new types of data and  methods of acquiring data. This is leading to a big  increase in our capacity to discover and assess the  key components of the biosphere, although access  to these new tools and their products is still unequal  among countries and sectors. A major lesson from  modern ecology is that humanity and the rest of the  biosphere are intrinsically linked, so we need   to construct Connected social-ecological futures   in which both humans and other life can thrive.   This requires major advances in incorporating  futures thinking into ecosystem modelling,  including deeper integration with social, political  and economic science. Such holistic understandings  of ecosystems will be necessary to navigate the  challenges and opportunities posed by Modified  and artificial life. There is scope to use modified  organisms to reduce the spread of disease, protect  species and restore ecosystems — which is both  exciting and profoundly morally challenging,  with technological advancements sometimes  progressing faster than regulatory frameworks. Not  only will more information be needed to navigate  this fast-transforming world: most of our conceptual  frameworks and ecological narratives will also need  to change.

3.2 	 Ecology

SUB-TOPICS

3.2.1	 Ecosystems in rapid transition

3.2.2	Innovations in data-gathering

3.2.3	Connected social-ecological futures

3.2.4	Modified and artificial life

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

Future breakthroughs in Ecology research will  draw on advances in many different fields, from  evolutionary biology to AI, and will include new  conceptual advances in social sciences. This explains  the high uncertainty scores and the perception that  major breakthroughs are still 10 years away. This  does not hold for Innovations in data-gathering,  where the coming five years will see many important  developments, and hence the lower anticipation  score for this sub-topic. Connected social‑ecological  futures have the potential to be the most  transformative for society in the future but require  strong multilateral collaboration.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/ecol

163
<<<END_PAGE_167>>>

<<<PAGE_168>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

PULSE OF SCIENCE

ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

164

Ecology

3.2.1 Ecosystems in rapid transition

Ecosystems are changing in diverse and hard-to-predict ways,13   due to a complex set of human drivers.

One such driver is the accumulation of novel substances such as microplastics,  pharmaceuticals and long-lived compounds, which are being found in the  environment with increasing regularity.14,15,16 There is uncertainty about the  nature and scale of their impacts,17 but emerging evidence suggests they may  affect ecosystem functioning.18

Climate change, in particular, though often in combination with other factors,  is causing shifts in the distributional ranges of many species.19 The average  native plant species is moving around 1.74 kilometres per year — non-native  species are moving significantly faster.20 Previously temperate ecosystems  are increasingly home to tropical species.21 As a result, some protected areas  face becoming obsolete because they are no longer able to protect the living  entities they were designed to protect. Many ecosystems are not changing  fast enough to keep up with the changing climate.22,23 Furthermore, because  species move at different rates, most ecosystems will not simply move but will  instead profoundly rearrange themselves. We are witnessing the emergence  of unprecedented ecosystems that include unprecedented combinations of  species. This is raising potential conflicts between human and non‑human  rights, and increasing risk to human health from zoonotic diseases such as  Ebola and Lyme disease.24,25

Humans are directly contributing to transformations by introducing new  species to regions where they did not previously exist, either accidentally  or purposefully.26 Researchers are exploring methods for containing such  invasions, including green infrastructure design.27 However, these efforts  will be complicated by the fact that invasive species can themselves evolve,  adapting to their new surroundings.28 Indeed, many groups of organisms are  now undergoing rapid evolution in response to anthropogenic changes.29,30  How ecological theory and practice navigate these transitions and novel  configurations is facing us with deep dilemmas in terms of ethics and logistics.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Effects of novel substances  and invasive species are  better understood

Understanding  of the impacts of  microplastics on the  health of organisms  and ecosystems is  significantly improved.  Reliable methods for  containing invasive  species are developed,  while researchers come  up with models that  deal with the emerging  reality of coexistence  and tolerance between  human and other  life. Researchers and  policy‑makers debate  the technical and  ethical aspects of  managing environmental  transformations.

Understanding of impacts  deepens

New models that are  able to forecast the  impacts of a given  invasive species on a  specific ecosystem are  developed. Research  gives improved methods  for characterising  the effects of  pharmaceuticals on  ecosystem functioning  and derived societal  consequences.

Forecast of species  movements leads to better  protective measures

Dynamic and  anticipatory design of  new protected areas  is based on forecasts  of ongoing species  movements. Reliable  design of rapid‑response  conservation actions  helps reverse or  ameliorate harms from  sudden ecosystem  transformations.
<<<END_PAGE_168>>>

<<<PAGE_169>>>
Ecology

3.2.2 Innovations in data-gathering

Our capacity to discover and assess different components of the biosphere  is increasing dramatically.31 In part, this stems from a myriad of technological  developments enabling the collection of new types of data.32 Environmental  DNA (eDNA) can reveal hidden diversity within communities33 and is  becoming increasingly accurate.34 Imaging technologies can identify  species, predict physiological processes35 and analyse ecological functions  even in complex ecosystems.36 Acoustic monitoring can reveal changes in  ecosystems,37 including underwater.38 Chemical sensors can detect volatile  organic compounds,39 many of which are used as signals. There is growing  scope for remote monitoring,40,41 including from space.42 On the scale of  individual organisms, tracking devices are increasingly small and smart.   AI is being embedded in all these tools.

Alongside these technological advances, there is a second growing source  of information and knowledge: Indigenous and local knowledge (ILK). While  Indigenous groups have often been shut out of research and conservation,43  in more recent decades there have been calls to generate more comprehensive  and equitably produced data,44 and resulting action.45 This more inclusive  approach has improved the assessment of endangered-species status,6 and  enabled more effective conservation action.47 While combining ILK and normal  science can be challenging, conservationists need to build on these early  successes and further enrich their work with ILK.48

This blizzard of new datasets poses a challenge: how do we integrate so many  diverse types of data? Can we build them into a global picture — and is that  even a useful thing to do? AI could help us process and understand these  enormous datasets, but only if they are sufficiently systematic to be learnable.49  However, such projects inevitably raise issues of privacy and data sovereignty.

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Biosphere data enables  study of ecosystem  dynamics

An avalanche of new  data on the biosphere  leads to more  replicable results and  can overcome some  of the biases in our  existing datasets. More  frequent data collection  allows researchers  to study ecosystem  dynamics rather  than just equilibrium  states. AI enables the  use of old data such  as natural-history  specimens, recreating  lost ecosystem histories.  Community science  plays a major role in  biodiversity research.

Holistic ecosystem data  become widely available

Researchers have an  increasingly holistic  view of ecosystem  change and biodiversity,  incorporating  information on  ecosystem structure,  function and  contributions to people.  Ecosystem models  are explicitly dynamic,  enabling investigation  of multiple interacting  drivers. Digital twins  of ecosystems —  computer models that  mimic the dynamics  of real systems —  offer computer-aided  design for ecosystem  management.

Early-warning systems  are adopted

Early-warning systems  alert communities to  imminent ecosystem  transitions, enabling  mitigation and  adaptation.

165
<<<END_PAGE_169>>>

<<<PAGE_170>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

PULSE OF SCIENCE

ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

166

Ecology

Connected social-ecological futures 3.2.3

A great many models of ecological conditions in the future have been  created50 and applied in practice.51,52 However, the scenarios that underpin  how these futures are modelled require a better integration of diverse  knowledge systems,53 surprise (uncertainty)54 and socio-economic and  political data.55,56 These improvements can help meet the challenges of  dealing with complex interactions between people and nature.57,58,59

More broadly, few models consider cross-system and cross-scale connections:  ecosystems are profoundly affected by economic, social and political  processes such as large-scale displacement of people, global supply chains,  governmental subsidies and treaties.60,61 War has rarely been treated in models  of global change even though war has significant effects on biodiversity —  nature’s contributions to people, food and energy systems.62,63,64 Then there  is climate overshoot, which will have lasting and widespread impacts.65,66  Understanding all these processes, recognising what can be quantified and  how best to include these aspects in models and their applications,67,68 is  crucial for understanding what could be a better future for people and other  life on Earth. There is also a need for models that take into account different  philosophical approaches and human values of nature,69,70 such as envisioning  a future of flourishing nature rather than a future of limited decline.71  Furthermore, understanding the importance of aspects that cannot be  quantified and therefore modelled, for example some Indigenous knowledge  approaches or relational values, and using other tools to incorporate these  futures, is also critical.72,73

Given the primacy of economics in many societies, it is crucial to further  integrate ecology with new forms of economic thinking, which may offer a  path to greater sustainability,74,75,76 embracing concepts such as degrowth77,78,79  and reciprocity with non-human life.80

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Models better  integrate more diverse  socio‑economic scenarios

Models better integrate  the interactions between  biodiversity — nature’s  contributions to  people — and climate  change, and are  underpinned by more  diverse socio‑economic  and political scenarios,  including transformation  towards more desirable  futures. Ecology is  increasingly integrated  into economics, enabling  forecasting of ecological  consequences of  monetary policy.

Technology enables more  holistic ecosystems models

Technology combines  diverse data streams  and helps generate  more holistic models  of ecosystems that can  be used to anticipate  possible futures, including  non‑linear relationships  and teleconnections  across ecosystems.  Models provide  early‑warning systems for  non‑linear dynamics in  ecosystems and include  surprise and uncertainty.  Models incorporate  socio‑economic  disruptions such as  war, human migration,  market collapse, political  upheaval and pandemics.  Agent-based models  are more widely used,  helping to account for  dynamic interactions  between people and  nature.

Diverse knowledge systems  inform decision-making

The recognition of the  validity of diverse  knowledge systems  enables the integration  of models and scenarios  with a wider range of  narrative storylines.  Including Indigenous  and local knowledge  systems in models is  best practice, enabling  more diverse values  for nature and a wider  range of solutions to  inform decision-making.
<<<END_PAGE_170>>>

<<<PAGE_171>>>
Ecology

3.2.4 Modified and artificial life

Research in fields such as genetic modification and synthetic biology  has enabled the creation of a range of modified life forms that blur the line  between natural and artificial life. This raises a host of practical, ethical  and cultural questions.

To date, the most widely deployed modified organisms are genetically  modified crops.81 Despite decades of use, our understanding of their  environmental impacts remains limited,82 and the public view of them  remains cautious or even critical.83

More recently, there have been ongoing efforts to develop genetic techniques  for controlling vector-borne diseases84 or invasive species.85 Many approaches  use a gene drive,86,87,88 a technology that ensures a particular version of a  gene is inherited and spreads through the population.89 This could be used to  impair the malaria parasites’ ability to develop and spread,90,91 or to prevent  mosquitoes from reproducing.92,93,94 It could also be used for reducing the  populations of invasive rodents in islands.95

However, it could be exceedingly difficult to retrieve a gene drive once  it has been unleashed. Despite current effort to test and mitigate their  risks,96,97,98,99,100,101,102 the potential impacts are largely unknown and could be  widespread and devastating. Ecological assessments contain an intrinsic  uncertainty that imposes limits on the reliability of even the most rigorous  processes of gene drive impact assessment.103

Other, possibly more controllable, approaches are being developed, such as  precision-guided sterile insect technique (pgSIT).104 This scalable system uses  CRISPR gene-editing technology to genetically kill females and sterilise males  which can be released into the environment at any life stage to emerge as  genetically sterile males that will suppress populations. It is currently being  tested in the field.105

Clearly, all of these innovations and potential interventions raise many  unanswered ecological, evolutionary, ethical and political questions.106,107,108,109

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Gene drives and similar  tools get closer to field  testing

Specific approaches  such as precision-guided  sterile insect technique  (pgSIT) are field-tested  under tightly regulated  conditions with biosafety  infrastructure in place.  Lab research and  development of biosafety  protocols prepares  anti‑malaria gene  drives for field testing.  Monitoring tools to track  their ecological effects are  developed.

Governments make  decisions about gene-drive  deployment

Depending on outcomes  of early trials and  decisions made by  national governments,  targeted operational  deployment of gene  drives integrated into  national malaria-control  programmes may begin  in some settings where  mosquito-borne diseases  are endemic. Continued  strict ecological and  evolutionary impact  assessments associated  with deployment are  put in place. Critically,  governments, in tandem  with other stakeholders,  constantly assess the  legal, ethical and cultural  consequences   of implementation.

Gene-drive platforms   are developed

Gene-drive  technologies lead to  the development of  modular programmable  platforms for the control  of disease‑vector  species. With this longer  horizon, continued  assessments need to be  conducted before full  implementation can be  accomplished.

167
<<<END_PAGE_171>>>

<<<PAGE_172>>>
ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF SCIENCE ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF SCIENCE

168 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

3.3

Future Food Systems

CHAIR:   Nam-Hai Chua

Andrew W. Mellon Professor Emeritus and Head  of Plant Molecular Biology at the Rockefeller  University, New York

CONTRIBUTORS:   Rodrigo Ledesma-Amaro, Kellye Eversole,  Jonathan Jones, Jiayang Li, Lone Dybdal  Nilsson, Rajeev Ram, Michael Strano,  Yuexin Yang, Cuilin Zhang

Suitably managed and directed, a set of ongoing  and future science and technology breakthroughs  offer an opportunity to sidestep likely problems  with food supply, improve food quality and make  the production of food more sustainable.

These opportunities come at an important time.   The global population continues to grow, having  topped 8 billion in 2022 and forecast to reach over  10 billion by the 2080s.1 The growing population will  lead to a 30 to 62 per cent increase in food demand by  2050 compared with 2010.2 Clearly, agricultural yields  must increase, and distribution improve, to ensure  adequate nutrition for all.

Scientifically informed policies to change global diets,  including major decreases in red-meat consumption  (as suggested in the planetary health diet), can  help to improve environmental and food-system  sustainability. Agricultural practices can be improved  both to reduce their impacts and to become more  resilient against stressors like extreme weather.  Genetic-engineering technologies such as CRISPR,  along with more traditional breeding practices, are  being used to enhance crops and livestock, both  in their nutritional value and their environmental  resilience.

AI is emerging as a key technology for managing  complex systems such as farms and soils. These  advances in AI will be complemented by the  development of smaller and cheaper in situ sensors,  as well as remote sensors, to closely monitor farms.  Approaches in nanotechnology can have applications  in agriculture, improving soil quality through  nano‑engineered additives, for example.3

This will be vital in mitigating the effects of  environmental crises such as climate change   and ecosystem degradation. This is particularly  important because, in many cases, agriculture already  operates with unsustainable practices the impact  of which will only be increased by the impending  environmental issues.

On top of these problems is the issue of food quality.  Here again, science and technology breakthroughs  can help. We know that even in countries where  people have access to sufficient calories, diets are  often nutritionally suboptimal and must be improved  if we are to avoid perpetuating significant health  problems. According to the Global Burden of Disease  report 2020, 22 per cent of all adult deaths in 2017 were  associated with poor diet, with cardiovascular disease  as the leading diet-associated cause of death.4 Type-2  diabetes, also associated with poor diet, was the ninth  leading cause of premature death globally in 2017.  This is particularly troubling because the situation is  getting worse: in 1990, type-2 diabetes was only the  18th leading cause of premature death. Ongoing  improvements in the methodology of nutritional  studies will help to uncover causal mechanisms  behind healthcare problems, however, and to create  strategies for optimising and personalising nutrition  to take into account the highly individual nature  of physiological responses to different types of  diet. Science-led personalised nutrition is set to be  increasingly important, at least in countries with the  infrastructure to support it.
<<<END_PAGE_172>>>

<<<PAGE_173>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

Bioengineering can bring more, new and better  food to the global market. Engineering crops  and livestock will be vital as we face the growing  nutritional requirements of the large future global  population. Reformatting the ecosystem involved in  food production is also an option. Possible strategies  include consideration of pollinators, soil quality  (including the soil microbiome) and the use of  chemicals and biotechnology for improving yield and  reducing the impact of weeds and pests. On top of  this, suitably directed research will enable a reworking  of the long-standing traditional processes and  practices of agriculture. Reimagining farming will   help to dramatically increase food production.  Technologies such as AI-led decision-making and  vertical farming are examples of potential paths  forward here. As well as increased food quantity, there  needs to be consideration of food quality, with a view  to giving individuals more opportunities to personalise  their nutrition and creating foods with higher  nutritional value generally. Optimising nutrition in  this way could have profound impacts on personal  health and significantly reduce the expenditure on  healthcare provision in societies that have generally  been impacted by widespread prevalence of diet- related health problems such as cardiovascular  disease and type-2 diabetes.

3.3 	 Future Food Systems

SUB-TOPICS

3.3.1	 Engineering crops and livestock

3.3.2	 Reformatting the ecosystem

3.3.3	 Reimagining farming

3.3.4	Optimising nutrition

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

Transformational advances in food systems are still  a decade away but the path to get there is relatively  well-defined. Reimagining farming is the sub‑topic  that contains innovations that are judged to be  most transformational for society. Reformatting  the ecosystem is the area that will require most  international coordinated action.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/f-food

169
<<<END_PAGE_173>>>

<<<PAGE_174>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

PULSE OF SCIENCE

ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

170

Future Food Systems

Engineering crops and livestock 3.3.1

A combination of conventional breeding and newer technologies such as  CRISPR genetic editing may significantly enhance the resilience of crops  and livestock to changing conditions, and the nutrient availability they offer.5

Biofortification, where conventional plant-breeding or modern biotechnology  techniques bolster the amount of iron and other essential minerals and  vitamins on offer, is an increasingly promising option.6 Although the factors  influencing both the nutrient content of crops and the scale of their absorption  by human bodies remain incompletely understood,7 many successes in  biofortification have already been achieved through conventional breeding,  and the potential of genetic-engineering technologies (gene stacking, where  two or more novel and useful genes are introduced into a single plant line,   is one example) remains largely untapped.8

Genetic engineering can also boost crop yields, for example by re-engineering  photosynthesis to boost energy capture.9 This can be coupled with improved  crop resilience to help cope with droughts,10 pests and disease, which together  account for 43 per cent of global crop loss.11,12 Domestication of resilient wild  species13 could increase agricultural resilience to changing environmental  conditions.14 RNA sprays, which deliver RNA-based vaccines against diseases to  crops, have considerable potential for improving resilience against pathogens.15

Engineering the plant bacterial microbiome can enhance crop production  and resilience.16 That is especially true for the rhizosphere microbiome  associated with plant roots, which can help crops resist disease.17 There is also  similar potential to engineer livestock. Already, researchers have used genetic  engineering to develop fast-growing AquAdvantage salmon (which has been  commercialised), pigs resistant to viral infections and dairy cattle resistant   to mastitis.18

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Genetic engineering of  plant metabolism improves  efficiency

Advances in fundamental  understanding of  photosynthetic  processes enable  genetic engineering of  the system to improve  efficiency. AI identifies  optimal targets for  genetic engineering of  the plant microbiome.

Engineering approaches  become mainstream

Crops with enhanced  photosynthetic efficiency  are routinely engineered.  First commercial  RNA vaccines for crop  diseases are created.  Meat from genetically  engineered livestock is  widely available. First  food proteins are derived  from carbon dioxide  by genome-edited  microorganisms.

New foods come to market

Multiple new strains   of cereals are  domesticated by genetic  engineering from wild  species. Understanding  of the plant microbiome  allows symbiotic  relationships to be  engineered to maximise  crop resilience and  yield. Global lab‑grown  meat that replicates the  sensory experience of  animal meat achieves  price parity.
<<<END_PAGE_174>>>

<<<PAGE_175>>>
Future Food Systems

3.3.2 Reformatting the ecosystem

Science and technology breakthroughs can help to improve the ecosystems  in which crops, livestock and agriculture exist. Research identifying threats  to pollinators, for instance, allows the development of interventions.19  Genetic engineering has been used to modify symbiotic microorganisms  living in honeybees, protecting them against Varroa mites20 and the  Nosema parasite.21 It may also be possible to engineer plants towards being  more efficiently pollinated.22

Research is increasing the specificity of pesticides, reducing unintended  effects on non-target organisms and thus mitigating harm to crucial parts  of the food chain and natural pest controls. Alternatives to pesticides, such as  RNA sprays, are in development.23 There is also growing attention being paid   to gene drives. These are heritable edits to the genes of a specific organism  that will spread through a population when the edited organisms are released  into the ecosystem. They can be used to render populations incapable of  spreading disease or to control the reproduction of invasive species,24 although  further research is required to avoid unintended consequences.25

Novel means of enhancing soils with nutrients, such as the addition of  biochar (a charcoal-like substance made from anaerobic burning of organic  material), are being explored.26 Understanding the soil microbiome, including  competition among microbes, is key.27 Conserving or restoring the soil  microbiome is also important, and has been shown to accelerate plant  biomass production by more than 60 per cent, making it a priority task.28  Knowledge gaps in the role of cropping systems in soil health remain,29,30   but improving understanding of fundamental ecosystem properties, especially  feedback mechanisms and complex interactions, should help close them.

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Technology helps improve  soil health

Analyses of soil  microbiome identify key  species and interactions,  while cheaper and  smaller sensors enable  more systematic  monitoring of soil health.  Effective microbial  and multiple‑genome  editing tools  enable microbiome  engineering.  Blight‑resistant potatoes  are developed.

Research gives deeper  understanding of pests  and pollinators

Further development   of gene‑drive technology  allows the risks that  gene drives bring  to be mitigated.  Understanding of  pollinators and their  role in ecosystems is  sufficient to develop  a global strategy for  pollinator conservation.  Stable synthetic  microbial communities  are developed.

Small-scale interventions  preserve productivity

The interactions  between farms and  their ecosystems are  tracked through a  widespread rollout of  monitoring systems,  allowing interventions  that enhance agricultural  productivity and prevent  degradation of the  natural environment.  Gene-stacking and  AI enable editing of  organisms within the soil  microbiome, significantly  boosting its utility.

171
<<<END_PAGE_175>>>

<<<PAGE_176>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

PULSE OF SCIENCE

ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

172

Future Food Systems

Reimagining farming 3.3.3

Researchers are following a number of approaches to re-engineer the  mechanisms of food production. One involves incorporating automation,   AI and other novel technologies into traditional forms of agriculture.31   For example, tools like deep learning can accurately identify the presence  of weeds and signs of disease from drone footage, enabling targeted  intervention32 and decreasing unnecessary pesticide use.33 Similarly,  engineered plant nanosensors and portable Raman spectroscopy could  potentially detect stresses and track the health of crops and soil.34

Such high-tech approaches to traditional farming can be complemented by  the use of agro-ecological tools35 such as microbe-based bespoke fertilisers,36  evidence-based crop choice and rotations.

Precision fermentation with engineered microorganisms can provide nutrient  sources and improvers for food products such as cultured meat, improving  texture and palatability and helping move towards viable large-scale  production.37 Microbes and enzymes are already being used as factories that  produce fats and proteins for nutrition products.38

The controlled release and targeted delivery of fertiliser ingredients  manufactured at the nanoscale may also improve sustainability by  ensuring more efficient use of nutrients.39 Combining these approaches  with “climate‑smart agriculture”, an acknowledgement of the need to take  changing climatic conditions and their increasing variability into account,40   will be especially important in developing economies, where farms often   lack resilience.41

Vertical farming, in which crops are grown indoors, close to population   centres and under artificial light, could have a number of significant benefits.  These include reduced food miles, reduced water use (watering systems are  closed) and cuts in chemical pollution from fertilisers.42 Making vertical farming  economically viable remains challenging, however.43

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Research improves new  approaches to farming

Studies of the  economics of vertical  farming identify the  key choke‑points  currently limiting the  technology. Improved  characterisation of  biochemical interactions  between plants enables  rational design of  mixed‑cropping systems.  Nanotech sensors  monitor crop plants  for stressors and other  key variables. Biomass  fermentation is used to  enhance nutritional value  of plant-based foods  and improve taste and  texture.

Farming technologies  create new processes for  food production

Cultured meat  reaches price parity  with conventionally  produced meat via  precision fermentation  of micronutrients and  macronutrients that help  reproduce conventional  texture and mouthfeel.  Technologies such as  AI and the “internet of  things” radically improve  farming practices.

Nanotech and biotech  provide foundation for  efficient farming

Widespread use of  nanotechnology delivery  systems for pesticides  and other interventions  see widespread use.  Biofertilisers replace  chemical fertilisers in  many countries. Farmers  have access to predictive  analytics, which guide  all practices, as well as  seeds and products  designed specifically  for their own complex  systems. Cultivated  meat is available in  structured forms, such  as steaks. Reduced cost  of producing highly  nutritious and palatable  fermented products  and cultivated meat  means that traditionally  undernourished  communities are   better fed.
<<<END_PAGE_176>>>

<<<PAGE_177>>>
Future Food Systems

3.3.4 Optimising nutrition

Research has made clear that, depending on factors like genetics and  lifestyle, people may require a different mix of nutrients and eating habits  for optimal health and well-being.44 Unpicking these details is key to  elucidating the causes of a number of significant health problems.

Scientists are now making progress in shaping the requirements of  personalised nutrition. Gaining such insights involves monitoring individual  responses to particular foods — including considerations of the age at   which they are introduced and of the role of the individual’s gut microbiome.  This has already shown potential to aid the development of a number of  important health measures, such as tools for preventing the onset of obesity   or food addiction.45

A key challenge is to understand the interactions between diet and the   gut microbiome.46 Physiologists have learned that the gut and brain are  strongly connected, interacting through links dubbed the “gut-brain axis”.47  Alterations to diet can impact the microbiome,48 with knock-on effects for  multiple bodily systems including the immune system and even mental  health.49 People’s individual gut flora differ significantly, so understanding   the microbiome is key to personalising nutrition.50

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Research gives a  clearer view of the gut  microbiome’s role

Focused investigations  achieve a systematic  characterisation of  individual variation in  gut flora in multiple  populations. AI  sees some success  in predicting  gut‑microbiome  responses to  interventions,  opening the path  to better‑informed  dietary advice. Precise  measurement of  individuals’ nutrition  status and underlying  determinants  becomes available to  a wider swathe of the  population.

Links between diet and  health are clarified

Physiological  mechanisms linking  diet and chronic  health conditions are  elucidated. Individual  variation in hormonal  responses to foods  is characterised.  Individualised nutrition  programmes and food  prescriptions.

Microbiome-testing  becomes standard practice  in nutrition planning

A gut-microbiome biopsy  becomes a standard  test during nutrition  planning. Researchers  achieve greater clarity  in developing nutrition  plans that can mitigate  chronic health risks,  leading to reliable,  proven interventions.

173
<<<END_PAGE_177>>>

<<<PAGE_178>>>
ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF SCIENCE ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF SCIENCE

174 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

3.4

Orbital Environment

CHAIR:   Lindy Elkins-Tanton

Foundation and Regents Professor in the School  of Earth and Space Exploration, Arizona State  University; Principal Investigator of the Psyche  mission, NASA

CONTRIBUTORS:   Tracy Drain, Kathryn Hadler, Jean-Paul Kneib,  Debbie Senesky, Vlada Stamenković

Our local region of space offers significant untapped  resources: an unrivalled view of Earth, almost  unlimited solar power, a high-quality vacuum and  microgravity in abundance. For the more ambitious,  there is the Moon, Mars and various near-Earth  asteroids. Between them, these offer water ice,  metals, building materials and real estate.

Earth orbit and rocky bodies are also potential human  habitats. NASA’s Artemis programme, which will send  humans to the Moon potentially as early as 2026,  will eventually create a lunar base.1 China has similar  plans, with the initial phase involving the creation   of a scientific facility in the Moon’s south polar region  by 2035.2 In the longer term, Mars could also become   a human habitat.

Wherever humans go, they will need power and  the capability to build the things they need using  local resources in exotic environments. Near-Earth  asteroids offer potentially valuable resources for  those able to make use of them. Space-based  manufacturing techniques will need to evolve to  make full use of these resources.

Closer to home, Earth orbits themselves are another  resource. The future of the International Space Station  is a topic of much debate and uncertainty. NASA  currently plans to begin de‑orbiting the station in  20303 but another option is for a commercial operator  to build on the station carcass to create a larger, more  capable facility.

The advent of commercial launch services is making  access to low Earth orbit cheaper and easier.  Companies like Sierra Space, Blue Origin and Axiom  Space are developing their own space stations  offering facilities for research, manufacturing, drug  development and so on.

One important cargo will be paying visitors.   Space tourism is a well-established business, albeit  on a limited scale. That looks set to accelerate, with  operators such as SpaceX, Virgin Galactic and Blue  Origin offering paid seats on flights. The future of  human space flight is highly dependent on ensuring  passenger safety, however.

All this activity is making orbital real estate an  increasingly crowded and valuable resource. So the  way the industry maintains safety and deals with  accidents will have a crucial impact on growth.

However these fields evolve, the orbital environment  will need to be protected, perhaps in the same  way as other global commons, such as the oceans  or Antarctica.4 That will require formal global  coordination, governance and an appropriate legal  framework.

In the 1960s, the space race was driven by geopolitical  tensions and played out as a proxy for war. An  important question today is how relations between  global superpowers will shape the next generation   of space exploration, given that the difference  between friendly cooperation and antagonistic rivalry  is likely to be profound.
<<<END_PAGE_178>>>

<<<PAGE_179>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

The regions beyond Earth contain a plethora of  resources that would be of value both on Earth  and in pursuit of human goals in terrestrial orbit  and beyond. Harvestable Extraterrestrial resources  include valuable minerals and resources for fuel,  construction and sustenance for space-based  communities, as well as solar energy. The Orbital  region itself is also proving valuable as real estate,  hosting ever more satellites that have increasing  commercial and military significance. An area ripe  for development is Space manufacturing, which  could significantly reduce the cost and difficulty of  space exploration and habitation, as well as providing  means to manufacture items that are difficult or  impossible to manufacture on Earth. The field of  Satellite innovation is seeing significant progress,  with an increasing number of agencies working on  the ability to manoeuvre one satellite to inspect,  refuel or even disable another. Some researchers  in the field have expressed concern about the  geopolitical implications of such developments. MORE INFORMATION:

3.4 	 Orbital Environment

SUB-TOPICS

3.4.1	 Extraterrestrial resources

3.4.2	Orbital region

3.4.3	Space manufacturing

3.4.4	Satellite innovation

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

Earth’s Orbital region is the domain requiring the  most global multilateral attention, given issues  around the management of space debris and the  proliferation of satellites and other orbiting objects.  The exploitation of Extraterrestrial resources still  requires sustained investments, research and  technological development over the coming  20 years. Major advances will occur with relative  certainty along the way, but the field will require  strong, coordinated international action.

go.gesda.global/orb-env

175
<<<END_PAGE_179>>>

<<<PAGE_180>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

PULSE OF SCIENCE

ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

176

Orbital Environment

Extraterrestrial resources 3.4.1

The resources available in space divide broadly into two categories: those  that can be used to support in-space activities and those that can eventually  be brought back to Earth.5 Most of the near-term opportunities involve using  resources in situ, with Moon exploration set to become a significant driver   of science and technology in this area.

Operating on the Moon will require locally produced resources, such as water  extracted from ice at the lunar poles. This can be broken down into oxygen  and hydrogen for propellant and life support, and the first pilot mission to  demonstrate this capability will be an important milestone. Characterising the  make-up of the regolith and the ice it contains will be an important early goal  for these missions.

Near-Earth asteroids are a more distant potential source of precious   metals, ores and ices. But the huge cost of such missions is a significant  stumbling block.

In 2023, the Space Solar Power Demonstrator (SSPD-1) satellite demonstrated  that solar power could be harvested in space and beamed to Earth in the   form of microwaves. Future challenges include expanding panels to the  kilometre scale.6

A different kind of resource is found on the far side of the Moon: a unique radio  silence that astronomers hope will give them access to clear signals from  elsewhere in the universe.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Moon landings trigger  public debate on lunar  resources

Decommissioning the  International Space  Station encourages  competition among  companies from the  US, Japan and China  to offer research and  manufacturing facilities  in orbit. NASA’s Artemis  programme and  commercial landers  increase global interest in  the Moon, with missions  demonstrating the  first extraction of water  and metals from the  lunar surface. This work  drives an international  debate on how best  to make use of the  Moon’s resources and  to spread the benefits  across all humanity while  preserving the lunar  environment for future  generations.

In-orbit manufacturing  comes of age

Space-based  manufacturing  becomes possible7  with the growing  resources available at  space stations in low  Earth orbit. The first  demonstrations of  continuous transmission  of solar power from orbit  to Earth provide valuable  momentum for net-zero  efforts, driven particularly  by countries like Japan  that have limited  terrestrial resources of  their own. But the cost  of the enterprise raises  questions about the  ability to scale production  to levels that will have  significant impact.

The Moon becomes the  gateway to the solar system

Lunar mining facilities  begin to continuously  produce propellant,  metals and building  materials on a usable  scale. This paves the  way for a lunar base  that is a self-supporting  manufacturing facility  for beyond-Earth space  exploration. At the same  time, lunar orbiting  facilities such as space  stations become key  hubs in the networks of  travel, manufacturing  and tourism. Much of  this is enabled by a  lunar communication  network and formal  lunar governance and  policy developed by  international diplomacy.
<<<END_PAGE_180>>>

<<<PAGE_181>>>
Orbital Environment

3.4.2 Orbital region

The orbital region around Earth is a resource of growing importance   and strategic value, largely because cheap commercial launchers have  made access easier.

Humanity uses this environment as a viewing platform from which it  can observe the Earth and the universe, as a thoroughfare for spacecraft,  and as a home for satellites. Satellites provide commercial services such  as telecommunications and Earth observation, civic services such as  climate studies, and weather-monitoring and military services such as  intelligence‑gathering and both offensive and defensive operations.

Nation states have already begun to increase resources devoted to protecting,  inspecting and destroying assets in space.8 The weaponisation of space is  increasing tensions and raising the stakes for space-related diplomacy.9

Overcrowding is likely to become an important issue, particularly in areas  of special interest, such as Lagrange points and low Earth orbit. But the  prospects of “Kessler syndrome”, in which a chain reaction of collisions  increases debris levels exponentially, will drop as operators remove the large  pieces of debris, like defunct satellites and spent rocket stages, that are the  greatest threat. Various companies and agencies are already developing  debris‑removal capabilities. Space tugs that can move satellites have already  been demonstrated, and the European Space Agency plans to demonstrate  the safe removal of a large piece of debris with its Clearspace-1 satellite,10   due for launch in 2026.

How this orbital hygiene will be organised is not clear, but there are calls for   a better form of space traffic control to reduce the chance of accidents, for the  planned clean-up of space debris and for an appropriate legal environment   to resolve disputes.

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

In-orbit debris   removal begins

Moving defunct  spacecraft and de‑orbiting  other large pieces of  debris becomes common  as commercial vehicles  with these capabilities  become available. But a  lack of transparency over  what objects are being  moved where increases  calls for a move towards  global governance of  space commons.

Debate over space   weapons heats up

Commercial activities in  facilitating launch and  returning objects like  small pieces of debris  from space dramatically  increase the cadence  of operations in orbit.  Spaceplanes, space  tugs and “free flyers” are  commonplace.

Space traffic control   gets green light

The world’s space traffic  control begins operating  from Rwanda (a legacy  of the Rwandan Space  Agency’s long-standing  role in space diplomacy).  This real-time service  coordinates on‑demand  launches to all  destinations.

177
<<<END_PAGE_181>>>

<<<PAGE_182>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

PULSE OF SCIENCE

ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

178

Orbital Environment

Space manufacturing 3.4.3

Earth orbit is a region of microgravity, high-vacuum conditions and clean  energy from the Sun. As such, it offers manufacturing industry a site that is  conducive to producing high-purity components, experimenting with exotic  manufacturing methods and even attempting to create substances that  cannot be made on Earth.

For example, these conditions ought to allow for higher-quality versions of  pharmaceuticals, metals or semiconductors that can outperform those made  on Earth.11 That should mean that large spare-part inventories for space-based  operations will become a thing of the past.

The most important manufacturing limitation is the availability of power.   A key enabler will be the availability of larger power sources both in orbit and  on the Moon. Kilowatt power sources are expected in the next two to three  years, but megawatts are needed for industrial-scale production. Finding ways  to establish these is an important goal for space agencies and commercial  operators such as Blue Origin.

Larger power systems will enable the manufacture and construction of bigger  structures like remote sensing antennas, the building blocks for human  habitation modules and semiconductor fabrication.

The longer-term goal is to find ways to make use of resources on Mars and  near-Earth asteroids, which may be accelerated by construction of a Moon  base or the use of lunar water ice, which can be readily turned into oxygen   and hydrogen for propulsion and life support.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Power boost for space  manufacturing

The in-orbit construction  of a replacement for  the International Space  Station and stations  for Japan and China  boosts manufacturing  capabilities in low Earth  orbit. The availability of  kilowatt power systems  in orbit and on the Moon  kick-starts research  and development  of microgravity  and low‑gravity  manufacturing  techniques. This allows  the prototyping of  products and materials  that are commercially  viable.

Construction of a new  international space   station begins

With a clear business  case for commercially  viable materials, space  manufacturing begins  to scale up, aided by  the construction of a  kilometre-scale array to  harvest solar power.

Lunar habitation  approaches feasibility

Moon- and Mars‑based  manufacturing of  building materials,  propellant and oxygen  for life support leads  to the prospect of  self-supporting lunar  habitation. Megawatt  power supplies  unlock a wide range  of opportunities for  lunar and orbital  manufacturing, allowing  space manufacturing to  enter the supply chain.
<<<END_PAGE_182>>>

<<<PAGE_183>>>
Orbital Environment

3.4.4 Satellite innovation

Giant networks of communications satellites are already a reality, with  constellations belonging to SpaceX’s Starlink, Amazon’s Project Kuiper and  Eutelsat OneWeb already in orbit and with others planned. These fleets will  quickly become more capable as companies deploy satellite-to-satellite  encrypted laser communications. Real-time video feeds from space are   also gaining in popularity.12

With launch costs dropping, satellite operators are experimenting with  off‑the‑self components for imaging, sensing and communicating at   lower cost.

One important limit on satellite lifetime is the amount of onboard fuel.   With high-end satellites costing hundreds of millions, refuelling is an attractive  way to extend lifetimes. Lockheed Martin13 and Northrop Grumman14 are  among companies developing a standard refuelling capability for satellites.  Orbit Fab has already tested liquid pumping technology aboard the  International Space Station and plans to offer satellite-refuelling services  in 2025.15 This will require greater manoeuvrability: changing orbits and  rendezvousing with other craft remains difficult, requiring plentiful fuel and  agile propulsion systems.16

However, the US, Russia and China are perfecting this technique in spacecraft  that can approach and inspect other vehicles.17 This, is already enabling  applications such as automated refuelling of spacecraft and dramatic  increases in operational lifetimes. It also raises security concerns, as close  approaches in orbit enable the disruption or even disabling of civil and   military satellites.

The increased activity on the Moon and in lunar orbit will require a lunar time  zone with satellites proving timing, positioning and communications. That will  require significant collaboration to develop international standards

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Satellite internet services  become global

The competition  among commercial  companies to offer  satellite broadband  internet connections  drives down the cost of  connection and helps  solve the long‑standing  problem of providing  rural internet access,  particularly in  developing countries.  International standards  agreed for de-orbiting  spacecraft at the  end of their life. Safe  communication with  ground systems such  as drones becomes  common.

Satellite operations have  geo-political impact

The geopolitical  implications of satellite  operations help drive  innovation and focus  efforts to govern and  coordinate operations  on an international level.  Higher-resolution Earth  observation becomes  more capable and  significantly cheaper.

Improved satellite  manoeuvrability

Low Earth orbit becomes  an attractive location for  data centres because  of the availability of  cheap power and free  cooling. However,  international tensions  over the deployment  of space weapons  and unauthorised  interference with  satellites raises the risk  of Earth orbit becoming  a region of warfare.  Lunar operations  lead to international  standards for coordinate  systems for timing,  communications and  above all safety. The  establishment of these  standards provides a  foundation for a globally  representative lunar  community.

179
<<<END_PAGE_183>>>

<<<PAGE_184>>>
ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF SCIENCE ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF SCIENCE

180 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

3.5

Ocean Science

CHAIR:   Sabine Gollner

Senior scientist at NIOZ Royal Netherlands Institute  for Sea Research in Texel

CONTRIBUTORS:   Diva Amon, Maya Ben-Yami, Elva Escobar,  Marcel Jaspars, Pei-Yuan Qian,  Andrew Sweetman, Jason Sylvan,  Moriaki Yasuhara, Erik Zhivkoplias

Our growing understanding of the ocean offers  enormous opportunities, both for the prevention  of harm and the enabling of benefits. By better  understanding marine ecosystems, we can do  a better job of safeguarding them from human  impacts like climate change and pollution. We can  also develop a sustainable bioeconomy based on  marine resources.1

An array of new technologies and methods are  leading to rapid progress in oceanography —   the physics and chemistry of the ocean. Automated  sensor arrays are enabling us to trace systems of  currents and nutrient flows in unprecedented  detail. Deep-sea exploration is revealing how the  ocean interacts with the solid Earth, notably in  hydrothermal vents, where mineral-rich water spews  up from beneath the seabed. The ocean is becoming  understood as a vast engine of currents and  chemical flows that is inextricably linked to wider  Earth-system processes such as plate tectonics and  the climate.2

This understanding is crucial because of the sheer  power of the ocean. As global average temperatures  continue to rise, the ocean is responding in complex  ways: sea ice is melting and retreating, currents  are slowing and shifting their paths, and stored  heat is moving. Our growing understanding of  oceanography will enable us to identify the most  significant and pressing risks, and to devise ways   to mitigate them.

Likewise, our knowledge of marine biodiversity  is progressing rapidly, driven by technologies like  eDNA and metagenomics. At the same time, our  understanding of marine ecosystems and the  services they provide is also increasing, enabled by  uncrewed vehicles and other tools for large-scale  ocean observation.

This knowledge is crucial to the well-being and  prosperity of society. We already know that  unsustainable human activities pose multiple  threats to key marine ecosystems in the deep sea  and in coral reefs, seagrass meadows and the Arctic  sea-ice biota. Our improving understanding of those  ecosystems offers an opportunity to find better ways  to conserve them — and thus to protect the natural  services they provide, ranging from food provision   to climate regulation.

The ocean can also offer opportunities, when  managed sustainably. While the impact of  large-scale industrial implementations is not yet  understood and thus must be developed with great  caution, the emerging “blue economy” sectors may  provide renewable energies, store carbon (marine  carbon-dioxide removal or mCDR), provide food   or harvest and utilise marine genetic resources.
<<<END_PAGE_184>>>

<<<PAGE_185>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

The ocean is a major and vital part of the planet’s  ecosystem, generating 50 per cent of oxygen,  absorbing 90 per cent of excess heat and capturing  25 per cent of carbon dioxide. However, much  of the detail of its characteristics, contributions  and changing properties are not yet understood.  The field of Oceanography aims to inform our  understanding of the physics and chemistry of the  ocean, such as currents, helping us to model and  forecast the effects of a changing climate and the  potential for tipping points to cause major change.  Researchers are still gathering new information on  Ocean biodiversity, including microbial marine life  and plants and animals living in the water and on  and in the seafloor, of which 90 per cent of species  are yet to be discovered. Research is also uncovering  the details of Ecosystem functions. The services  that the diverse deep-sea ecosystems, as well as  plankton, seagrass and corals in shallower seas, bring  to the ocean system remain largely unexplored,  and further insights will be vital to conservation  efforts. This information is required to enhance  our understanding of Human impact and ocean  stewardship to facilitate better outcomes for the  ocean environment and dependent life in the face   of climate change and other challenges.

3.5 	 Ocean Science

SUB-TOPICS

3.5.1	 Oceanography

3.5.2	 Ocean biodiversity

3.5.3	 Ecosystem functions

3.5.4	 Human impact and  ocean stewardship

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

Ocean Science is an area with an overall high  Anticipation Potential score. The transformational  effects of all domains surveyed and the need for  international coordinated action are both very high,  especially for Ocean biodiversity and Human impact  and ocean stewardship. Advances in research on  Ecosystems functions are more uncertain, and  the field should take 12 years to reach maturity,  contributing to a higher Anticipation Potential score.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/ocean-sci

181
<<<END_PAGE_185>>>

<<<PAGE_186>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

PULSE OF SCIENCE

ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

182

Ocean Science

Oceanography 3.5.1

We are rapidly improving our understanding of the physics of the ocean,  including the mapping of currents, temperatures and flows of chemicals.  A major driver has been remote-sensing technologies for sea-surface  monitoring, notably the Argo network of nearly 4000 robotic floats.3  Researchers can now follow floating debris such as marine plastic pollution  across oceans.4

For the first time we can track long-term changes. More heat is being  transported into northerly waters, for instance.5 Currents are changing,6   with some slowing down or speeding up,7 and vast “gyres” shifting position.8  Ocean chemistry is also in flux: dangerous low-oxygen zones are growing.9  Researchers are now watching for evidence of tipping points,10,11 such as   a slowdown or collapse of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation  (AMOC),12 although timescales remain difficult to determine.

There is an urgent need for more data on the physical characteristics of the  ocean, especially in the deep sea, which is constrained by gaps in our ability  to gather data, whether using survey vessels, moored buoys, Argo floats or  instruments tied to animals. If this situation can be improved by more scientific  research as well as acquisition of data from commercial and military vessels  (and through geochemical proxies that provide historical data, sometimes over  million-year timescales), it may be possible (though this is still a subject   of debate) to create a “digital twin” of the global ocean that is detailed enough  to be useful in oceanographic prediction and intervention modelling.13

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Ocean history becomes  clearer

Improved  palaeoceanographic  proxies reveal how ocean  behaviours have changed  over millions of years.  Research gains a better  understanding of the  physical mechanisms  driving changes in the  ocean, for example by  analysing how freshwater  inputs in the North  Atlantic affect ocean  circulation. The behaviour  of the ocean is analysed  under a more complex  range of climate-change  scenarios, including those  with overshoots and with  net-zero climate actions.

Remote sensing  improves

Cheaper and more  efficient remote  sensing enables  detailed monitoring of  ocean‑surface currents,  temperature and other  factors throughout the  world ocean. Long-term  continuous deep-sea  monitoring leads to  improved understanding  of the dominant  forces driving change  in the oceans. New  Earth‑system models  become available,  enabling improved  understanding of  oceanographic processes  such as carbon-dioxide  exchange and saturation,  and the stability of  circulating-current  patterns.

Data provides capacity  to forecast major changes

Combining data,  modelling and physical  understanding enables  forecasting of major  oceanic changes such  as shifting currents  and upwelling.  Higher-resolution  models resolve  existing discrepancies  between models  and observations.  Observations until 2050  allow us to understand  the ocean’s reaction to  rapid climate change, for  example determining  the stability of the AMOC  and how much it can  weaken.
<<<END_PAGE_186>>>

<<<PAGE_187>>>
Ocean Science

3.5.2 Ocean biodiversity

Despite rapid progress, many discoveries about ocean biodiversity remain  to be made. Technologies like eDNA and metagenomics are revealing  unprecedented diversity in the “ocean genome”,14 aided by sampling  programmes such as Tara Oceans.15 Bio-logging enables remote tracking of  animal behaviour,16 while acoustic sensors are increasingly contributing to  biodiversity assessments.17 Furthermore, machine learning can be used to  make sense of vast datasets, for example characterising the functional traits  of plankton.18 There remains a need for consistent identifiers across different  kinds of biodiversity data so researchers can make links between databases.

The immense variety of microbial marine life19 is only now coming to light20 —  as are the complex ecosystems found in deep-sea water, as well as on and In  the deep seabed.21,22,23,24 As the climate warms, some species are moving to  new areas, creating an urgent need to understand which ones are becoming  invasive.25 More broadly, there is a need for more tracking of biodiversity, both  to establish baselines and to follow trends as climate change26 and other  human impacts mount up.27 Although warming is slower in the deep ocean,  research suggests that its biodiversity is no less exposed than that of surface  waters because of free-drifting (pelagic) larval stages in many deep-ocean  organism life cycles and because of most deep-sea organisms’ adaptation to  cold and stable conditions. Indeed, projections indicate that, while mitigation  could limit threats to surface biodiversity, deep-ocean biodiversity will face an  unavoidable escalation in threat.28 The ongoing threats to ocean biodiversity  will limit the potential of marine genetic resource use.

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Monitoring improves  assessment

A combination  of monitoring  techniques and  environmental‑impact  assessments by more  nations, including low-  and middle-income  countries, make fuller  assessments of ocean  biodiversity possible.  Improved remote  tracking of animals  enables mapping of  long migrations and  of key regions such as  spawning grounds. eDNA  can identify species in  a biome. Imaging and  acoustic monitoring can  recognise the species of  large animals. Automated  image capture helps  monitor species  abundance. Research  achieves better estimates  of the number of species  in the ocean.

Biodiversity-tracking aids  conservation efforts

Multi-year studies enable  tracking of biodiversity  trends and inform  conservation efforts  to establish efficient  marine protected  areas. International  capacity‑building and  knowledge‑sharing  programmes enable  broader use of eDNA  tools for biodiversity  monitoring. Improved  wet-lab methods  and high-pressure  aquaria enable more  controlled studies of  marine organisms and  biochemistry, including  chemical signalling.

Species-specific forecasting  comes of age

Reliable forecasting  allows predictions  of which species will  become invasive.  Keystone species are  identified, enabling  protective measures.  Reliable predictions  of the chemicals an  organism makes, and  the roles it plays in its  ecosystem, become  possible, based  primarily on its genome  sequence. Humankind  benefits from marine  genetic resources  through applications  of biodiscovery of  pharmaceutical  compounds and from  inspiration for novel  materials and structural  design.

183
<<<END_PAGE_187>>>

<<<PAGE_188>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

PULSE OF SCIENCE

ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

184

Ocean Science

Ecosystem functions 3.5.3

The functions of marine ecosystems and the ecosystem services they  provide are still being studied and are little understood,29 with major  discoveries continuing to be made and even basic ecosystem functions  like oxygen production not fully resolved30. For instance, in recent years  ecologists have realised the critical importance of wetlands, mangroves,  seagrass beds and coral reefs, often operating as a single unit which  supports the recovery of entire ecosystems and their services,31 and even  traps marine plastics.32 Similarly, the scale of ecosystem services provided   by plankton continues to expand under examination.33

Increasing exploration of the deep-sea water column and seafloor — by  submersibles, robotic vehicles and other methods — is revealing complex  ecosystems unlike anything at the surface. Hydrothermal vents are emerging  as major contributors to the marine ecosystem.34 Researchers are finally able  to explore the microbes living in oceanic crust,35 revealing hidden ecosystems  shaped by magmatism and water-rock interactions.36 Some marine microbes  perform metabolic processes such as degrading petrochemicals,37 and  genetic information from deep-sea microbes and from sponges has aided  the development of antiviral drugs and rapid testing for COVID-19.38 Marine  genetic resources represent a large, mostly untapped, source of potentially  useful substances.39 However, the open-water pelagic zone (including the dark  ecosystem), the largest habitat on Earth, remains under‑explored.

A key challenge is to determine the fluxes of carbon and other nutrients  through marine ecosystems, enabling us to track the carbon budget of the  oceans,40 including the deep ocean,41 and the oceans’ ability to remove carbon  from the atmosphere.42 Autonomous platforms can help monitor these  biogeochemical processes.43 Behaviours such as deep diving by large predators  like sperm whales are crucial to these fluxes.44

Available data on ecosystem function covers less than the past 25 years.  Attention has mostly focused on a handful of charismatic groups, notably  shallow-water corals, the decline of which is fairly well-documented.45  Expanding this longitudinal tracking to other species, including in the deep  sea, will be crucial for tracking ecosystem responses to climate-driven changes  such as ice-shelf collapses.46 It will also be key for planning how we use and  conserve marine ecosystems.47

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Deep oceans are opened  for study

New technologies  and methods arise for  studying deep‑ocean  ecosystems, including  microbial ones.  Research achieves a  better understanding  of how marine  biodiversity affects  ecosystem function.  Awareness of the  impacts, effectiveness,  social implications  and governance issues  relating to plans for  marine carbon‑dioxide  removal (mCDR) are  discussed more broadly.

Multi-year studies expose  deep-ocean trends

Multiple longitudinal  studies of ecosystem  functioning are carried  out, extending to deeper  regions of the sea that  could previously only be  visited intermittently.  There are systematic  surveys of ecosystem  services by different  organisms and  ecosystems. Researchers  collaborate to build  interconnected global  databases of biodiversity  and ecosystem function,  and to identify legal  and governance gaps  relating to mCDR.

Machine learning and other  emerging technologies  inform marine ecosystem  conservation

A global catalogue of  sound, bioluminescence  and chemical seascapes  in the dark ocean, the  chemicals produced  by marine organisms,  and their functions and  interactions predicted  by machine learning,  aid conservation. AI  identifies biota from  images and video  to assist biodiversity  assessments and  generate an open‑access  identification library.  Research achieves an  improved mechanistic  understanding of  the links between  biodiversity and  ecosystem function,  based on multiple data  sources and AI.
<<<END_PAGE_188>>>

<<<PAGE_189>>>
Ocean Science

3.5.4 Human impact and ocean stewardship

Human impacts on the oceans are considerable and rising.48 Climate  change is deoxygenating, acidifying and warming the oceans, pollution  such as fertiliser run-off from farms threatens many ecosystems, and  overfishing is also destabilising many. There are emerging impacts, too,  such as the nascent deep-sea mining industry49 and initiatives to remove  carbon dioxide to the ocean to mitigate climate change. These impacts  intersect in numerous ways:50,51 for instance, ocean biodiversity affecting  climate.52 However, with effective knowledge-gathering and policy-making,  it should be possible to minimise harms and create a sustainable future for  the oceans.53 AI may have roles to play here, for instance in modelling the  impacts of interventions.54

Better understanding of our impacts will come from improvements in  monitoring, for instance by robotic surface vehicles,55 and in expanding  our observations to the remote deeps.56 There is great potential for citizen  scientists to contribute57 both to ocean observations and to conservation.58  New “blue” industries like marine aquaculture may have key roles both in our  economies and in marine conservation.59 Capacity-building and knowledge  transfer will be crucial to understanding all parts of the ocean from south   to north and shallow to deep.

Managing the oceans is a major geopolitical challenge.60 A key issue is to  determine, by leveraging scientific expertise and co-design, which kinds  of policy interventions will be the most beneficial and have the fewest  unintended consequences. The UN BBNJ (biodiversity of areas beyond  national jurisdiction) treaty,61 once ratified, will regulate the sustainable  use of marine genetic resources, environmental-impact assessments and  area‑based management tools such as marine protected areas in the ocean  outside national boundaries.62 Successes in ocean diplomacy, such as with  the adoption of the BBNJ treaty, will need to be built upon to assist future  ocean‑science and conservation efforts.63 Conservationists are increasingly  exploring radical ideas such as granting legal rights to nature.64

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Citizen scientists   expand their role

Low-cost, accessible  monitoring devices  enable citizen scientists  to significantly expand  their role in tracking  ocean ecosystems.  Research is spurred by  improved understanding  of cultural connections  to the sea, including the  cultural heritage of the  deep sea.

A sustainable “blue”  economy emerges

Understanding  is sufficient for  rational design of  marine-conservation  interventions and of  regulations for the  sustainable “blue”  economy. Standardised  and reliable methods  for conserving shallower  ecosystems are  developed. In many  deep-sea ecosystems,  however — such as  hydrothermal vents or  the abyssal plains — the  pace of recovery is so  slow (where possible at  all), that the prevention  of any degradation  remains essential.

AI and systematic analysis  improve conservation

Earth-system models  and AI are used to  simulate global-level  interactions between  the oceans, their  ecosystems and the  wider Earth system.  Systematic analyses of  biodiversity-conservation  interventions  demonstrate the key  factors determining  effectiveness of  initiatives such as  marine protected  areas. Transdisciplinary  research, including  social, anthropological,  legal and economic  expertise, establishes  methods for estimating  the financial value of  ecosystem functions   and services.

185
<<<END_PAGE_189>>>

<<<PAGE_190>>>
ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF SCIENCE ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF SCIENCE

186 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

3.6

Pathogen Biology

CHAIR:   Christian Happi

Distinguished Professor of Molecular Biology  and Genomics, and Director of the Institute of  Genomics and Global Health, at Redeemer’s  University in Ede, Nigeria; Adjunct Professor at  the Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health in  Boston, Massachusetts

CONTRIBUTORS:   Isabella Eckerle, Claudia Igler, Moritz Kraemer,  Nevan Krogan, Karen Maxwell, Al Ozonoff,  Angela Rasmussen

Despite many lessons having been learned from  the COVID-10 pandemic, it is inevitable that  humanity will face another pandemic.   This prospect is decidedly uncomfortable, but  can also be a provocation to create innovations in  research and healthcare. These will be of significant  value: even in the absence of a global outbreak,  pathogens pose a significant ongoing threat to  human health and wellbeing.

Current research in pathogen biology is already  creating pathways towards important healthcare  improvements and the means to contain future  outbreaks and limit their impact. It also offers  profound discoveries: pathogen biology informs   all biology, because pathogens are excellent   model organisms.

Tools like rapid genome sequencing, immunological  profiling and AI will enable the speedy development  of new treatments that are tailored to emerging  diseases. Furthermore, improved surveillance tools  have the potential to swiftly monitor and contain  outbreaks, and potentially even prevent them.  Achieving these goals requires interdisciplinary  research and depends on publicly available  systematic datasets.

Despite the progress, much of the potential of this  research is not being fully harnessed. Low- and  middle-income countries often have limited capacity  to detect, monitor and contain outbreaks.1 This is  partly the result of a lack of capacity in scientific  fields like genomics and structural biology2 — and  means many countries are effectively flying blind  when it comes to pandemic preparedness. In other  countries, governments are reducing their support  for pathogen biology and related fields.3 Researchers  are anxious for policy-makers to see the value of  continued research and development, which will  be crucial in averting the worst impacts of the next  pandemic.4
<<<END_PAGE_190>>>

<<<PAGE_191>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

Pathogens — organisms that infect us and cause  disease — remain a grave threat to health and  well‑being. One level of research into this threat aims  to unpick the mechanisms by which pathogens  enter our cells, effectively Decoding infectivity.  Improved understanding of these mechanisms  will enable novel treatments and preventative  strategies. A related effort focuses on Zoonotics and  evolution across species: how pathogens that infect  animals make the leap to infecting humans, and  how we might prevent this. Similar research enables  improved Epidemiology and prediction: outbreaks  can now be tracked using multiple data sources.  Finally, many teams are focused on Emerging  opportunities for intervention, which step beyond  existing tools like antibiotics to explore phage  therapies, mRNA vaccines and more.

3.6 	 Pathogen Biology

SUB-TOPICS

3.6.1	 Decoding infectivity

3.6.2	Zoonotics and evolution  across species

3.6.3	 Epidemiology and prediction

3.6.4	Emerging opportunities   for intervention

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

Infectious diseases remain a major threat to  human health, with climate change causing new  diseases to emerge or existing diseases to affect  new populations. Advances in our understanding  of pathogen biology will allow the design of new  interventions but this still requires significant  research. These sub-topics’ high disruptive  potentials also contribute to the high anticipation  scores. Zoonotics and evolution across species  remains a highly transformative area of research,  with impactful breakthroughs expected in the  coming 10 years.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/path-bio

187
<<<END_PAGE_191>>>

<<<PAGE_192>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

PULSE OF SCIENCE

ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

188

Pathogen Biology

Decoding infectivity 3.6.1

Rapid progress in molecular and cell biology is enabling a deeper  understanding of the mechanisms by which pathogens infect human   cells. A crucial step forward has been the development of AI tools such   as AlphaFold, which predicts the 3D structure of a protein based on   its amino-acid sequence. Such tools can characterise key molecules  (including their mechanisms and functions) faster than traditional  experimental methods. Likewise, ongoing improvements in the speed and  accuracy of DNA sequencing mean there is now a wealth of data on the  genomics of pathogenic and non-pathogenic microorganisms.

Other work is improving our understanding of how the immune system  interacts with other bodily systems in intricate ways. A seemingly simple  infection might set off a complex cascade of changes within the body, for  example, especially in conditions like long COVID. Conversely, children’s plasma  proteome is remodelled by exposure to malaria, leading to natural immunity,  and understanding this could lead to new therapeutics.5

Bringing such distinct datasets together is challenging but offers the potential  for great insights.6 It has become possible to predict COVID-19 mortality solely  by analysing gene expression in the patient’s blood, for example.7 Similarly,  rich biological datasets are helping to explain long-established but mysterious  patterns in infection biology. For instance, specific changes in the immune  system may account for the much higher death rates from COVID-19 among  the elderly.8

AI is mining insights from the vast datasets generated by research.   For example, machine-learning models can predict how virus proteins   will interact with host proteins,9 and forecast long-COVID outcomes based   on immunological data.10 However, AI expertise and infrastructure is currently  centred in the rich West: there is an urgent need to expand AI access in   low- and middle income countries, where it can enable biomedical progress  even in low-resource settings.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Infection scenarios can   be reliably predicted

Reliable predictions of  which pathogens will be  able to infect which hosts,  based on genotype,  become possible. These  will be underpinned by  systematic mutagenesis  experiments. Researchers  gain improved  understanding of the  holistic impacts of  infections, such as viruses  causing cancer, and  chronic conditions like  long COVID.

Pathogen genotypes reveal  likely consequences of  infection

A pathogen’s phenotype,  including the type of  illness it causes, can  be reliably predicted  from its genotype. AI  is in routine use for  development of drugs  and vaccines.

AI models eliminate   animal research

Researchers achieve  the elimination of most  animal research on  pathogens and of most  in vitro experiments.  Instead, AI models  trained on datasets  like the Human Cell  Atlas provide insights.  Gain‑of‑function research  is also performed  computationally in  most cases. Targeted  treatments arise for  conditions like multiple  sclerosis that are linked  to chronic infections  from viruses such as  Epstein-Barr.
<<<END_PAGE_192>>>

<<<PAGE_193>>>
Pathogen Biology

Zoonotics and evolution  across species 3.6.2

Pathogens that jump from other species into humans are the most  significant source of new diseases and outbreaks. Predicting and preventing  such “zoonoses” remains a challenge,11 requiring the integration of molecular  and microbiological data with ecological and sociological information.

Basic knowledge of microbial life also needs to be improved. Some potential  zoonotic pathogens, like H5N1 bird flu, are fairly well characterised.12 However,  the majority of bacteria and viruses have not been studied at all. Researchers  are working to change this, for instance by bringing all vertebrate-virus  associations together in one database13 and by using AI to help document  unknown viruses.14

With this knowledge base in place, it should be possible to predict which  pathogens are likely to spill over into the human population and how  dangerous they would be if they did.15 AIs trained on these datasets could   help make such predictions, leading to early-warning systems.16

However, truly reliable predictions require a recognition that outbreaks are  not caused just by highly pathogenic organisms but by human disturbance  of ecosystems that allows novel diseases to come into contact with our  populations. The One Health framework offers a set of tools with which to  attempt this.17 Some models of this type have been developed.18 However,  the One Health approach remains under-used: for example, there is little  coordination between surveillance of animal diseases and of human diseases.

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Viral traits can be  anticipated

Analysis of sequences  achieves better  anticipation of viral  traits, in particular the  identification of animal  viruses that could spill  over into humans.  Researchers gain an  improved understanding  of the dynamics of  zoonotic outbreaks,  enabling reliable  decisions on when to  step in to prevent an  outbreak becoming   an epidemic.

A global surveillance  system is put in place

A smart and sustainable  global surveillance  system, based on  multiple sources  of data including  environmental sampling  and air sampling, is  established. Researchers  gain a system-level  understanding of the  interactions between  pathogens, hosts and  ecosystems. This enables  improved management  of the food sector  to prevent zoonotic  spillovers.

AI provides spillover  predictions

AI trained on multimodal  data gives reliable  predictions of future  zoonotic spillovers.  The modification of  vectors and reservoirs  begins to prevent  spillovers, while targeted  animal‑vaccination  programmes also  eradicate potential  spillover events. Rabies   is close to eradication.

189
<<<END_PAGE_193>>>

<<<PAGE_194>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

PULSE OF SCIENCE

ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

190

Pathogen Biology

3.6.3 Epidemiology and prediction

Predicting outbreaks, and tracking them once they begin, is essential   to public health.19

Traditional pathogen surveillance methods such as contact tracing can   now be combined with other data streams, from genomics20 to social media.  For instance, improvements in DNA sequencing mean it is now feasible to  rapidly reconstruct how a disease outbreak occurred, including tracing it back  to source.21 An improved understanding of human factors that affect spread,22  such as malnutrition and genetic vulnerabilities, could significantly aid the  tracking of epidemics.23

However, successfully integrating and using these datasets remains a  challenge,24 especially in low- and middle-income countries where resources  are limited. It is likely that our initial attempts to predict the course of  outbreaks will underperform due to siloed systems, data latency and  interoperability barriers. While such systems may nevertheless offer some  insight, it is likely to be too coarse, or arrive too late, to be used as the basis   for effective action.25

Several major opportunities exist. An improved understanding of the  interactions between pathogens, which affect when and where outbreaks  arise, could enable better predictions. A biobank of infection samples  from patients would be a valuable resource for both experimental and  computational research. And there is considerable potential to train AI on  outbreak datasets and use it to make predictions,26 but so far little has been  done — in part due to data-access limitations.

The most effective data ecosystems are likely to be decentralised and  trust‑based, rather than centralised and coercive. West Africa is a good  prototype: pathogen surveillance systems there blend formal and informal  health intelligence. Truly resilient systems will arise from diversity, redundancy  and local agency, not from top-down architectures. One possible model is  to create regional “epidemic foresight nodes” that can detect patterns and  simulate response scenarios.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

AI improves outbreak  prediction

Attempts at outbreak  prediction begin to  use AI to integrate  multiple data streams  such as genomics,  human mobility and  climate. Improvements  in trust and data  integration enable  major practical gains in  outbreak prediction and  handling from targeted,  community-driven  surveillance.

New data sources  come online

A dramatic expansion  of health-relevant data,  including environmental,  behavioural, pathogen  and host-resilience data,  is collected through  an array of methods,  including wearables,  ambient sensors,  satellites and low-cost  diagnostics. These novel  data sources, integrated  into improved models,  enable better forecasting  of outbreaks of diseases  such as cholera. Advances  in learning, computation  and data generation  make decentralised  surveillance more  effective. AI enables  better forecasts of  outbreaks and their  progress.

A global picture   of pathogen threats   is established

Research achieves  a map of the global  infectome, analogous  to those of the human  genome, revealing all  the pathogens infecting  humans and animals.  Deep, continuous  sensing detects and  characterises most  infections in near-real  time. This is enabled  by low-cost molecular  diagnostics, plus  wearable, environmental  and infrastructural  sensors. Surveillance  systems mirror the  human immune system:  they are decentralised  and adaptive, with built- in redundancies. The  most resilient are not  centrally controlled, but  are nonetheless globally  connected.
<<<END_PAGE_194>>>

<<<PAGE_195>>>
Pathogen Biology

3.6.4 Emerging opportunities  for intervention

Many new categories of therapeutic have been developed in recent   years, and others are likely to emerge in the next two decades.   These new interventions will be vital because of a host of threats:  antimicrobial resistance (AMR), new zoonotic outbreaks and a growing  burden of chronic disease that exacerbates the risks from pathogens.

Some new therapeutics have already found widespread use. mRNA vaccines  were deployed in vast numbers against COVID-19, after decades in development  hell. So were monoclonal antibodies. Gene editing for inherited diseases is also  increasingly mainstream.

Other promising approaches remain largely untapped. One such example  is phage therapy — using viruses called bacteriophages to treat bacterial  infections.27 Phage therapy could be used to treat antimicrobial-resistant  bacteria, saving many lives.28 A key challenge is to better characterise the  interactions between the viruses and their bacterial hosts,29 which will help  ensure that the chosen phages actually destroy their target organism.30

A second avenue of attack is to hamper the evolution of antimicrobial resistance,  ensuring that antibiotics remain useful for longer. This requires an improved  understanding of bacterial evolution.31 Key challenges include predicting the  behaviour of mobile genetic elements32 and improving our understanding of  how drug treatments trigger the evolution of resistance.33,34

Techniques such as cryogenic electron microscopy and AI are enabling rapid  progress in our understanding of molecular interactions such as protein-protein  interactions.35 This promises a multitude of new therapeutic targets that could be  targeted rapidly using the tools of synthetic biology. Existing drugs could also be  repurposed.36

Finally, the rapid emergence of new pathogens is spurring attempts to develop  broad-spectrum treatments such as a pan-coronavirus vaccine.37 Multiple  methods are being pursued: for instance, it may be possible to develop a  “universal antibody vaccine” based on monoclonal antibodies.38

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Breakthrough therapies  come online

Precision phage  therapy is used to treat  antimicrobial‑resistant  infections, while  microbiome  interventions treat  neurological and  psychiatric conditions.

Novel tools create research  opportunities

Research brings  improved tools to  discriminate between  natural pathogens and  engineered pathogens.  AI models microbial  ecosystems such as  the gut microbiome,  enabling targeted  interventions.

Generalised vaccines bring  therapeutic advances

Pan-family vaccines and  antivirals are developed  for major virus families,  and synthetic phage  therapies offer highly  targeted treatments.  New treatments for  chronic conditions are  developed thanks to an  improved understanding  of pan-disease  mechanisms in the  human body.

191
<<<END_PAGE_195>>>

<<<PAGE_196>>>
ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF SCIENCE

ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF SCIENCE

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 192

INVITED CONTRIBUTION

Assisted evolution and  ecosystem restoration

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-IC-3-1

Michael Dawson

Professor in the department of Life and Environmental  Sciences at the University of California, Merced
<<<END_PAGE_196>>>

<<<PAGE_197>>>
Ecosystems around the world are in trouble.   In some cases, they might recover if given  sufficient time. In others, it seems unlikely that  they can do so, at least within an acceptable  timeframe. Critical parts of the system may have  been severely damaged or lost altogether. That has  turned attention to eco-augmentation — the idea  that humans should actively attempt to restore or  enhance the functioning of an ecosystem.

Eco-augmentation can be controversial, but in many  ways it is nothing new. People have shaped their  environments in directions they find appropriate  since time immemorial. More recently, there have  been deliberate, if perhaps opportunistic, attempts  to create artificial alternatives to ecosystem  components — for example, by sinking oil platforms  to create artificial reefs.

Now there is talk of assisting the migration of certain  organisms to restore function where it is needed or  to assist evolution in developing organisms that can  provide such function. Such assisted evolution might  be achieved through selective breeding, which is  already familiar to most people, or through genetic  engineering, which many people find strange and  sometimes threatening.

At the extreme, we could go beyond promoting  genes that natural selection has already established  and design organisms which fill particular niches in  an ecosystem. How can we decide whether this or any  other intervention would be safe and justified? When  we look at an ecosystem, how do we decide if it needs  our help; and if it does, how can we understand what  the underlying problem is, and then how we might  be able to fix it?

The ecosystems that I spend most time studying  are the vast underwater kelp forests off the US West  Coast, which are hugely important in building up fish  stocks, cleaning up fertiliser run-off and sequestering  carbon dioxide. These ecosystem services are  estimated to be worth $52 billion a year to the West  Coast economy alone,1 and so it is in our interests that  these forests thrive.

We focus on the sunflower sea star, a large starfish  which seems to play a key role in the ecosystems   of kelp forests by eating sea urchins, which in turn eat  kelp. There is evidence of this animal’s importance  from an outbreak of disease which killed nearly all  the sunflower sea stars in the southern half of their  range between 2013 and 2015: kelp-forest ecosystems  collapsed, having already been weakened by a marine  heatwave.

Such incidents are likely to grow more common in  the near future, so with colleagues we are working   on a breeding programme for sunflower sea stars.   As part of that, we want to be sure that the brood  stock we use represents the genetic diversity of this  species, and in particular we are looking for genes  that are involved in resilience to sea-star wasting  disease. If we can find such genes, we can breed   sea stars that have them and so are more resistant   to the disease.

We could do that through selective breeding using  sea stars that are evidently able to survive the disease.  Or we could identify the genes that confer this  resistance, then single out those sea stars that have  these genes to use in our breeding programme,  thus speeding up the process. Or we could modify  the genes of many sea stars to make them resistant,  which would speed things up even more. Which is  the correct path?

These aren’t just decisions for researchers, but for all  those involved with the kelp forests. At a minimum,  we would need regulatory permission to introduce  any kind of bred sea stars into the kelp forests, but   the discussions should go much further.

193
<<<END_PAGE_197>>>

<<<PAGE_198>>>
ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF SCIENCE ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF SCIENCE

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 194

My lab also studies the marine lake ecosystems  of the western Pacific. These unique ecosystems  have prospered evolutionarily, having been isolated  from the ocean for thousands of years — but their  dynamics appear to be shifting. In Palau, for example,  we’ve seen changes over the past 25 years associated  with warming lake temperatures, where previously  dominant, unique, species are now often absent.  That is of obvious environmental significance, but it is  economically important too: large numbers of tourists  pay a $100 fee to visit “Jellyfish Lake”, whose previously  millions of golden jellyfish, Mastigias papua etpisoni,  live nowhere else. These temperature-sensitive  animals are at risk as the climate changes; could  the lake be geoengineered to keep it cool? It is,  relatively speaking, a small, simple and self-contained  ecosystem, so monitoring and managing the  environment may be feasible. If amelioration works  there, perhaps it can provide principles for a more  interventionist form of eco-augmentation.

In contrast, the kelp-forest ecosystem on the West  Coast spans thousands of kilometres. The sunflower  sea star has been a big part of our work but it is just  one species. We need to understand how all the  organisms in these ecosystems interact, and how  they vary both between different forests and within  individual forests. Our focus is on how this diversity  responds to stresses or changes in the environment  at a genetic level, so that we can better understand  the ways that species or populations might adapt   to the new conditions.

This is not a new approach, in principle, but what is  new is the toolset now available to us — principally  those that allow us to sequence the unique genetic  codes of individual organisms cheaply, easily and  quickly.

That means we can see how genetics varies between,  say, healthy and degraded regions of kelp forest, and  find those variants that help the organism survive  in different environments. Genomes evolve over  generations, and so we are also looking at genetic  processes that change much more quickly, including  epigenetic responses — chemical changes in DNA  that occur during an organism’s life and affect how  its genes are expressed. We could also look for genes  that are important in, say, signalling or predation. Our  ultimate aim is to make tools that can quickly assess  the health and interconnectedness of different forests.

Our proposal now is to build up the number of  species we have covered. At the moment we are  looking at the ecological data on interactions.  We will pick species that have known roles in the  ecosystem: the predators and the prey, for instance,  or the symbionts and the hosts. At the moment  we’re targeting approximately 15 species per habitat,  but that is a small fraction. There are lots of species  out there that we don’t know yet, and many ways in  which genetics varies even within the same species.  These may be driven by small differences in their  environment: their depth in water or exposure to  sunlight, for example. Such differences may prove  to be significant as those environments change  incrementally in coming years.

We also need a much better understanding of  how ecological interactions are linked to genomic  adaptations. We might expect species that interact  more frequently to co-evolve — that is, they should  exhibit shared patterns of genetic variation through  time as the environment changes.

The genetics of creatures that can live only in  symbiosis, for example, might be expected to change  in unison. Species that have nothing in common  would evolve independently. Species that have some  key interactions — predators and prey, for example —  should be somewhere in between. There’s interest in  doing this with sunflower sea stars and sea urchins,  for example: putting them in aquaria together and  see how they respond, what their biochemical and  gene expression is and whether it is subsequently  accompanied by epigenetic modification.

We can look for these relationships between  organisms through statistical analysis of their genetic  data. That can then be built upon through fieldwork  that tracks the rise and fall of wild populations, or  the changing presence of different organisms at  different locations. Ultimately, we could build model  ecosystems which include individual interactions  between species. But that requires a commitment   to collecting genetic and ecological data in great  detail at large scales on an ongoing basis.
<<<END_PAGE_198>>>

<<<PAGE_199>>>
People once improved bridge construction by, in  a manner of speaking, building them and seeing  whether they fell down. Then scientists better   worked out the physics of bridges. That means  engineers can now design more complex and larger  bridges and build them, confident that they will   stay up. Eco‑augmentation is still at the trial‑and‑error  stage. But in 25 years’ time, if we have been able to  collect sufficient data, we should be able to model   the evolution of ecosystems under climate change  and human pressures, and how they could evolve   as a result — and how we can help them to recover  and thrive.

195
<<<END_PAGE_199>>>

<<<PAGE_200>>>
PULSE OF DIPLOMACY

PULSE OF DIPLOMACY ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 196

CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS

Progressing pandemic  preparedness

3.6	 Pathogen Biology

From the rise of drug-resistant disease-causing  pathogens to the emergence and spread of new  infectious diseases, global health security remains  of top concern.

What role can innovative business models play in  enhancing progress on pandemic preparedness?

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-PD-3-1

PARTICIPANTS

Moderated by:

With:

Suerie Moon

Co-Director of the Global Health Centre   at the Geneva Graduate Institute.

Seth Berkley

Senior Advisor to the Pandemic Center at  Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island.

Jennifer Cohn

Director, Global Access, at the Global   Antibiotic R&D Partnership in Geneva.

Meret Gaugler

Healthcare Investor.

Andrin Oswald

Director and Co-Founder of the   Swiss Vaccines Initiative.

TAKEAWAY MESSAGES

“Mostly because of  misinformation, one-third of  people in the US did not receive  any COVID-19 vaccine, and  two-thirds got no booster.  Growing nationalism is one of  the biggest dangers to pandemic  preparedness.”

“We are living through  a renaissance in vaccine  development.”

“At present antimicrobial  resistance is leading to more  deaths than HIV and malaria  combined.”

“The US market does not reward  the research and development of  new antibiotics.”

“Chronic poor health made  populations vulnerable to  COVID-19.”
<<<END_PAGE_200>>>

<<<PAGE_201>>>
197
<<<END_PAGE_201>>>

<<<PAGE_202>>>
PULSE OF DIPLOMACY ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF DIPLOMACY ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 198

CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS

Climate resilience   and food security

3.3 Future Food Systems

As climate change intensifies and extreme  weather events become more frequent, the  pressure on global food systems escalates.

How are advances in synthetic biology,  genetic engineering and AI being deployed  to augment ecosystems for climate resilience  and food security?

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-PD-3-2

PARTICIPANTS

Moderated by:

Presentation:

With:

Chris Luebkeman

Head of Strategic Foresight at ETH Zurich.

Rose A. Marks

Assistant Professor in the Department of Plant  Biology at the University of Illinois.

Nam-Hai Chua

Senior Investigator (Emeritus) at Temasek   Life Science Laboratory, Singapore.

Aisha Hadejia

Partner at Sahel Consulting, Nigeria.

Matthias Honegger

Climate Interventions Program Director at ICFG —  International Center for Future Generations.

TAKEAWAY MESSAGES

“Lead researchers from the  Global North often do not  involve local people in their  work in the Global South, and  as a result local people do not  adopt products of the research.”

“We need to diversify our food  sources. Humanity relies on  just four crops — corn, wheat,  rice and soybeans — for about  80 per cent of our food energy.  All are under threat from  “abiotic” stresses such as extreme  weather.”

“Micronutrient deficiency is a big  problem in the Global South.”

“European mistrust of genetically  modified crops is denying us the  benefits they can bring.”
<<<END_PAGE_202>>>

<<<PAGE_203>>>
199
<<<END_PAGE_203>>>

<<<PAGE_204>>>
PULSE OF DIPLOMACY

PULSE OF DIPLOMACY ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 200

CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS

Governing space’s next  frontier to benefit all

3.4	 Orbital Environment

The expanding public and private access to space  blurs the line between exploration and exploitation,  requiring international governance to ensure  equitable benefits and preservation of these global  commons in space and on Earth.

How can multilateral actors anticipate  opportunities and risks for people, planet and  society, and unlock the full potential of space  exploration?

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-PD-3-3

PARTICIPANTS

Moderated by:

With:

Alok Jha

Science and Technology Editor at The Economist.

Lindy Elkins-Tanton

Principal Investigator for NASA Psyche mission   at Arizona State University.

Tanja Masson-Zwaan

Assistant Professor at Leiden University   in The Netherlands.

Carole Mundell

Director of Science at the European Space Agency.

TAKEAWAY MESSAGES

“Space debris and congestion   is the most immediate challenge  for governance.”

“Private, non-state actors have  become far more significant:   one company, SpaceX, owns half  of all functioning satellites.”

“We must respect the  investments of commercial space  pioneers while ensuring that  we don’t see a “gold rush” that  drives inequality.”

“Space provides a narrative   of inspiration.”
<<<END_PAGE_204>>>

<<<PAGE_205>>>
CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS

Bridging science and   diplomacy for the future  of corals

3.2	 Ecology

As the world’s coral reefs face unprecedented  threats from climate change, pollution and other  human activities, it is imperative to harness  cutting-edge science and international diplomacy  to safeguard these vital ecosystems.

How are governments, scientists and funders  collaborating to protect corals in the Red Sea,  Caribbean and Great Barrier Reef, and what lessons  can be applied to rehabilitate other   reefs worldwide?

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-PD-3-4

PARTICIPANTS

Moderated by:

Introduction:

With:

Muriel Siki

Journalist.

Alexandre Fasel

State Secretary at the Federal Department   of Foreign Affairs, Switzerland.

Tamaki Bieri

Chief Operating Officer at Coral Gardeners   in Moorea, French Polynesia.

Emma Camp

Team Leader of the Future Reefs Program at the  University of Technology Sydney, Australia.

Fanny Douvere

Head of the World Heritage Centre’s Marine  Programme at UNESCO.

Kristen Marhaver

Project Director and Associate Scientist at The  Marhaver Lab of the CARMABI Foundation, Curaçao.

Anders Meibom

Professor at the Laboratory for Biological  Geochemistry at EPFL, the Swiss Federal Institute   of Technology in Lausanne.

TAKEAWAY MESSAGES

“The best way to protect coral  for the future is to establish  marine and land reserves.”

“We need easy-to-use technology  for monitoring and conserving  coral.”

“The groups working to  protect coral are scattered  and disconnected: we need an  overarching organisation that  brings together scientists and  local people .”

201
<<<END_PAGE_205>>>

<<<PAGE_206>>>
PULSE OF IMPACT ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF IMPACT ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

202 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Media-innovation analysis

The most dominant discussion topic within  Eco-Regeneration & Geoengineering is Orbital  Environment, with Ecology, Ocean Science and  Energy Engineering, by contrast, receiving less  attention, despite their higher scientific output.

LEGEND:

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/3-impact

YoY PATENT GROWTH  YoY growth of topic mentions  from May 2023-April 2024 to  May 2024-April 2025

YoY MEDIA GROWTH  YoY growth of granted topic  patents from May 2023-April  2024 to May 2024-April 2025.

LOW HIGH

YoY PATENT GROWTH2

LOW YoY MEDIA GROWTH1

3.1 Energy Engineering

3.6 Pathogen Biology

MEDIA-INNOVATION MATRIX

3.2 Ecology

3.5 Ocean Science

3.3 Future Food Systems

3.4 Orbital Environment

HIGH
<<<END_PAGE_206>>>

<<<PAGE_207>>>
CUMULATIVE INVESTMENT IN FUTURE FOOD SYSTEMS COMPANIES

140000

CUMULATIVE INVESTMENT (MILLIONS USD)

120000

100000

80000

60000

40000

20000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

NUMBER OF NEW INVESTMENTS IN FUTURE FOOD SYSTEMS COMPANIES

NUMBER OF INVESTMENTS

800

600

400

200

0

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

NUMBER OF NEWLY FOUNDED FUTURE FOOD SYSTEMS COMPANIES

NUMBER OF NEWLY FOUNDED COMPANIES

300

200

100

0

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

IMPACT FOCUS:

3.3

Investments in the area of future food systems have  increased exponentially during the past decade,  propelled by a rapid acceleration during 2017.  Furthermore, when compared with other science-  and technology-related domains in the Radar,  cumulative investments in this area are the highest  over the surveyed period. Even though the rate of  company creation in this area appears to be slowing,  pressures from the changing climate and increased  urbanisation mean that the field is likely to continue  to draw large investments and interest from the  private sector in the future.

Source, facing page: Deep View analysis from 1 May 2022 to 20

April 2024; (1) YoY media growth = YoY growth of topic mentions

from May 2022/April 2023 to May 2023/April 2024; (2) YoY patent

growth = YoY growth of granted topic patents from May 2022/

April 2023 to May 2023/April 2024.

Source, this page: Pitchbook

*Data on newly founded companies in 2023 is incomplete and

will be updated once first funding is raised. Projections indicate

similar levels of company creation to 2021.

Investment and  company creation in  Future Food Systems

203
<<<END_PAGE_207>>>

<<<PAGE_208>>>
ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF SOCIETY ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING PULSE OF SOCIETY

204 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

What do people say?  An analysis of mainstream media articles, blog  posts and scientific articles over a period of  12 months shows that while global sentiment  on Eco-Regeneration & Geoengineering  is mostly optimistic, especially in Asia and  Africa, challenges to the energy transition  and concerns around disease surveillance, for  example, point to an urgent need for resilient  and inclusive green innovation. The most  dominantly discussed topics under the  Eco-Regeneration & Geoengineering umbrella  are Energy Engineering and Pathogen  Biology, but Orbital Environment showed the  biggest increase in coverage this year.

MAINSTREAM MEDIA SENTIMENT

Positive          Neutral          Negative

MAINSTREAM MEDIA 1 May 2024 - 30 April 2025

UNIQUE ARTICLES

VISUALISED ARTICLES

NET SENTIMENT

ARTICLE UNIQUENESS

1 May 2024 - 30 April 2025 SOCIAL MEDIA

NUMBER OF POSTS

VISUALISED POSTS

NET SENTIMENT

UNIQUE IMPRESSIONS

74% 18%

1512k 6k 80% 53%

4,813k 9.5k 47% 199b

Pig Kidney Transplant

Development Pig Kidney Transplant

Pig Liver Transplantation

Pig Liver Transplantation

Breakthrough awards  Program

Breakthrough awards

Program

New Species

New Species

Real Estate  Decarbonization

Real Estate  Decarbonization

Ecology Conservation

Ecology Conservation

Conserving Aquatic  Biodiversity

Conserving Aquatic

China Green

China Green

Biodiversity

transformation

transformation

Institute of Oceanography

Institute of Oceanography

AI in Satellites

AI in Satellites

Lootah Biofuels

Lootah Biofuels

Space Exploration

Space Exploration

Food Innovation  Conference

Food Innovation

Conference

Meteor Study

Meteor Study

Trump, Ukraine Clean

Trump, Ukraine Clean

Energy System

Energy System

Critical Minerals

Critical Minerals

Nutrition

Nutrition

Innovation & Global

Innovation & Global

African Energy

African Energy

Impact of Smart Grids

Impact of Smart Grids

Development

Development

Indian Fossil Fuel

Marine Science

Indian Fossil Fuel

Marine Science

Development

Marine Biodiversity

Marine Biodiversity

Global Sustainable

Global Sustainable

Agriculture

Agriculture

Biodiversity Conservation  Law

Biodiversity Conservation

Law

Advances in Global

Advances in Global

Green Energy Transition

Green Energy Transition

Economy

Economy

Sustainable Agriculture

Sustainable Agriculture

India Energy

India Energy

Transformation

Transformation

Circular Economy

Circular Economy

AI in Energy Transition

AI in Energy Transition

COP 16

COP 16

Ethanol as Biofuel

Ethanol as Biofuel

Urban Biodiversity

Urban Biodiversity

Conservation

Conservation

De-extinction Tech

De-extinction Tech

Breakthrough in Synthetic

Breakthrough in Synthetic

Biology & Therapeutics

Biology & Therapeutics

Nutrition

Nutrition

Crop Engineering

Crop Engineering

Total Ankle Replacements

Total Ankle Replacements

Pathogen Study

Pathogen Study

Zoonotic Diseases

Zoonotic Diseases

Antibiotic Resistant  Infections

Antibiotic Resistant

Infections
<<<END_PAGE_208>>>

<<<PAGE_209>>>
DEMOGRAPHICS & SENTIMENT PER REGION

North America

58% 16% 26%

+ Sustainable

+ Health

+ Clean Energy

GLOBAL SENTIMENT

•	The global sentiment surrounding Eco-Regeneration & Geoengineering  remains broadly positive, particularly in Asia and Africa, where advancements  in agricultural technologies, sustainable energy cooperation and healthcare  innovation are seen as enablers of long-term growth.

•	In contrast, North America, Europe and the Middle East exhibit more cautious  sentiment, driven by concerns around slowing solar adoption, energy grid  challenges and rising public-health threats, which temper the overall optimism.

- National Security

- Toxic Food

- Overweight

Latin America

61% 23% 16%

+ Biodiversity

+ Energy Change

+ Agriculture

- Biodiversity loss

- Toxic Food

- Climate Change

Europe

62% 17% 21%

+ Sustainable

- Diseases

+ HVAC

- Crop losses

+ Biodiversity

- Wild fires

Africa

63% 27% 10%

+ Renewable

- Engineered Poverty

- Diseases

+ Biodiversity

- Social Issue

+ Economy

•	The discussion in North America is largely dominated by the US, accounting  for 88% of the conversation. In South America, Mexico (25%) and Brazil (17%)  lead the discourse, with comparatively limited engagement from other  countries.

•	In Europe, the conversation is centred around the UK (54%) and Germany (10%).  Africa’s discussions are led by Nigeria (31%) and South Africa (23%), while in Asia,  India dominates the discourse with 64% of posts. The Middle East sees the United  Arab Emirates as the primary contributor, responsible for 23% of regional posts.

Source: Deep View social media analysis from 1 May 2024 to 30 April 2025. Note: English-language social

media postings; reposts were excluded from the analysis.

MENA

68% 21% 11%

+ Clean energy

+ Innovation

+ Circular Economy

- Heat Wave

- Chronic Illness

- Ecosystem loss

Russia & Asia

69% 16% 16%

+ Clean energy

- Forest Loss

+ Rich Ecosystem

- Government

+ Smart Grids

- Diseases

Oceania

55% 16% 28%

+ Clean energy

- Mosquitos

+ Innovation

- Heart Diseases

- Toxic Environment

+ Free Food

205
<<<END_PAGE_209>>>

<<<PAGE_210>>>
PULSE OF SOCIETY ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

PULSE OF SOCIETY ECO-REGENERATION & GEOENGINEERING

206 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Media analysis

KEY TAKEAWAYS    Despite a continued overall decline of 6%, Energy  Engineering remains a dominant topic with  growing interest in Integrated energy and Digital  energy innovations. Sub-topics like Alternative  sustainable fuels and chemicals and Coupling  energy and environment continue to shrink,  suggesting a shift in focus to system-wide solutions.

For Pathogen Biology, although continuing an  overall post-pandemic drop in mentions as key  sub-topics like Decoding infectivity (-11%) and  Epidemiology and prediction (-13%) lose traction,  it is notable that Emerging opportunities for  intervention has surged by 38%, reflecting renewed  interest in next-generation disease-prevention tools.

Sentiment around Eco-Regeneration &  Geoengineering is shifting downward. However,  sentiment is still positive overall, driven by  initiatives promoting sustainable energy usage and  agriculture. Conversely, negative discussions are  fuelled by concerns about biodiversity loss, failure   of disease surveillance and the slow pace   of transformation towards a sustainable future.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/3-society

SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM

MAINSTREAM MEDIA DOMINANCE

SOCIAL  MEDIA SENTIMENT

Eco-Regeneration  & Geoengineering

134%  Eco-Regeneration & Geoengineering

DOMINANCE UNIQUE ARTICLES

1512k

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

52% 20%

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

61% 17%

EMERGING  TOPICS

3.1 Energy Engineering

9%  Alternative sustainable fuels and chemicals

-8%  Coupling energy and environment

-8%  Digital energy innovations

6%  Integrated energy

-6%  Energy Engineering

3

1

4

2

1

4

2

475k

3

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

SENTIMENT - 2023-24 62% 26%

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

67% 18%
<<<END_PAGE_210>>>

<<<PAGE_211>>>
3.5 Ocean Science 3.3 Future Food Systems 3.2 Ecology 3.6 Pathogen Biology

3.4 Orbital Environment

38%  Emerging opportunities for intervention

13%  Innovations in data-gathering

-7%  Human impact and ocean stewardship

0%  Zoonotics and evolution across species -13%  Epidemiology and prediction

14%  Orbital region 11%  Extraterrestrial resources

-7%  Connected social-ecological futures

5%  Re-formatting the ecosystem

-14%  Engineering crops and livestock

10%  Orbital Environment

-12%  Ecosystems in rapid transition

8%  Space manufacturing

-22%  Optimising nutrition 6%  Reimagining farming

-4%  Modified and artificial life

5%  Satellite innovation

-5%  Future Food Systems

-4%  Ecosystem functions 2%  Ocean biodiversity

-11%  Decoding Infectivity

-10%  Pathogen Biology

-24%  Oceanography

-7%  Ocean Science

-7%  Ecology

4

1 2

2

4 3

2 3

2

2

4

3 4

3 1

1

3

1

1

4

DOMINANCE DOMINANCE DOMINANCE DOMINANCE DOMINANCE

4

4 1

1 2

2 3

1

2

283k 4

76k 4 1

3 137k

3 213k 4

346k

1

3

2 3

2

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

60% 23%

SENTIMENT - 2023-24 64% 18%

SENTIMENT - 2023-24 58% 31%

SENTIMENT - 2023-24 54% 25%

SENTIMENT - 2023-24 59% 25%

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

58% 19%

58% 13%

62% 18%

58% 20%

57% 18%

207
<<<END_PAGE_211>>>

<<<PAGE_212>>>
PLATFORM INTRODUCTION SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

PLATFORM INTRODUCTION

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

208

SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM

SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM

4

4

Science & Diplomacy

Science plays a central role in multilateralism.  Research breakthroughs in areas as diverse as  privacy and digital security systems, AI, vaccines,  understanding of language, economics and group  behaviour all play a role in improving global health,  engagement of citizens in their societies, wealth  creation and cross-cultural understanding. Futures  research and science-based diplomacy can help  diplomats and policy‑makers to anticipate how these  breakthroughs will impact individuals, society and  the planet. Here, we explore the achievements and  challenges of the research areas that are directly  influencing humanity’s trajectory.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®
<<<END_PAGE_212>>>

<<<PAGE_213>>>
GESDA GEOPOLITICS LENS (pages 210–213)  The geopolitics of science and technology

PULSE OF SCIENCE (pages 214–263)

PULSE OF SCIENCE (pages 216-253)

Containing deep insights into anticipated advances  in the relations between Science & Diplomacy  over the next 5, 10 and 25 years, the GESDA Pulse  of Science provides the expert opinions of leading  researchers in topics such as digital security,  economics, futures research, group behaviour  and language.

Containing deep insights into anticipated advances  in the relations between science and diplomacy  over the next 5, 10 and 25 years, the GESDA Pulse  of Science provides the expert opinions of leading  researchers in topics such as digital security, futures  literacy, group behaviour and science diplomacy.

PULSE OF DIPLOMACY (pages 264–267)

PULSE OF DIPLOMACY (pages 254-257)

The GESDA Pulse of Diplomacy captures the latest  discussions between diplomats and scientists at the  2023 GESDA Science and Anticipation Summit on  topics such as predicting the onset of armed conflict,  computational diplomacy and superforecasting.

The GESDA Pulse of Diplomacy captures the latest  discussions between diplomats and scientists at the  2024 Geneva Science and Diplomacy Anticipation  Summit on topics such as understanding the  future role of IP, democratising science literacy and  capacity-building for anticipatory leadership.

PULSE OF IMPACT (pages 258-259)

PULSE OF IMPACT (pages 268–269)

Current investment trends and dynamics of company  creation highlight digital security as an increasingly  significant area. The GESDA Pulse of Impact provides  data detailing private sector investment, intellectual  property activity and company creation in the area of  digital security since 2000.

Current investment trends and dynamics of  company creation highlight digital security as an  increasingly significant area. The GESDA Pulse  of Impact provides data detailing private-sector  investment, intellectual-property activity and  company creation in the area of digital security  since 2000.

PULSE OF SOCIETY (pages 260-263)

PULSE OF SOCIETY (pages 270–273)

Powered by AI, the GESDA Pulse of Society’s  network and dynamic sentiment analysis of both  mainstream and social media reveals macro and  micro trends in public opinion around the world  on topics relating to science and diplomacy.

Powered by AI, the GESDA Pulse of Society’s network  and dynamic sentiment analysis of both mainstream  and social media reveals macro- and micro-trends in  public opinion around the world on topics relating   to Science & Diplomacy.

209
<<<END_PAGE_213>>>

<<<PAGE_214>>>
GEOPOLITICS LENS

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

210 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

GEOPOLITICS LENS:

The geopolitics of science   and technology

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-lens-geo

Henry Farrell

SNF Agora Professor of International Affairs   at Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International  Studies in Baltimore, Maryland

Kyle Chan

Postdoctoral Research Associate and Lecturer  in Sociology at Princeton University, New Jersey

Federica Du Pasquier

Lecturer on Law and Global Affairs at Yale University  in New Haven, Connecticut
<<<END_PAGE_214>>>

<<<PAGE_215>>>
Following decades of relatively free trade and  aggressive globalisation during which economic  growth arguably reigned supreme as a foreign‑policy  objective, geopolitics is dramatically altering the  landscape of the global economic and financial  system in ways not seen since the 1930s. So  pronounced is the shift that a term is being revived  to describe it: “geoeconomics”. This describes the  use of economic tools to advance geopolitical  objectives. Leveraging tariffs, exports controls and  sanctions, states today seek to control key nodes in  critical sectors to maintain or achieve hegemonic  dominance.

Cutting-edge science and technology are amongst  the most prominent of these critical sectors and have  become a theatre of intense competition. Take AI:  recent debates around it have been dominated by  geopolitical considerations, with great powers racing  to reach artificial general intelligence (AGI) before their  rivals. To do so, the US restricted American firms’ ability  to sell advanced semiconductors to China, for example.  China has threatened to suspend rare‑earth exports  necessary for critical hardware components to the US.

Where traditional power was measured in terms  of territory, military might or economic output,  the ability to shape, control and deploy advanced  technologies now determines the contours of global  influence. This shift is visible in the way states and  other actors increasingly treat scientific knowledge,  technological infrastructure and the flow of expertise  as strategic assets to be guarded, leveraged or denied.  In the Cold War era scientific fragmentation was  constrained to areas with direct military application,  and broad international collaboration remained. Now,  however, the domains that are considered strategic  have expanded into general fields such as AI and  biotechnology.

Another important difference to the Cold War era  is today’s unprecedented level of global economic  interdependence. Global supply chains have become  intricate international networks that connect  manufacturers, suppliers, logistics providers and  consumers across continents to produce and deliver  goods or services. The COVID-19 pandemic and  more recently the Russia-Ukraine war have shown  how disruptions in one part of the world — such as a  shortage of personal protective equipment from China  or natural gas from Russia — impact industries and  economies worldwide.

These interdependencies create choke points that  are being weaponised. In the context of science and  technology, a choke point is a critical node —   a material, process or platform — that is essential  for the functioning of a broader system. Control  over such a node allows an actor to exert significant  influence, either by enabling their own progress or by  constraining the capabilities of others. The appeal of  focusing on choke points lies in their efficiency: rather  than attempting to dominate entire technological  ecosystems, actors can target specific vulnerabilities  that ripple outward.

The global semiconductor supply chain, for example,  has become a focal point for such strategies, as access  to cutting-edge chips is indispensable for a range of  emerging technologies. Similarly, the ability to set  technical standards, regulate key software platforms  or control access to specialised scientific equipment  can translate into significant leverage. For example,  the European Union’s GDPR not only governs digital  privacy within Europe but has become the de facto  global privacy standard, as international businesses  must comply to operate in the EU (this outsized  influence is sometime referred to as the “Brussels  effect”). In terms of equipment, the Dutch company  ASML is the sole supplier of the extreme‑ultraviolet  (EUV) lithography machines required to manufacture  the most advanced microchips.

211
<<<END_PAGE_215>>>

<<<PAGE_216>>>
LENS SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

GEOPOLITICS LENS

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

212

This approach is not limited to hardware. Increasingly   it extends to intangible domains such as data and  talent, which have become the lifeblood of scientific  and technological advancement.

Data, in particular, has assumed a central role in the  geopolitics of the 21st century. The ability to collect,  store and analyse vast quantities of information  underpins progress in AI, biotechnology and other  fields. As a result, control over data pipelines — and  thus who can access, process and benefit from data —  has become a matter of national and economic  security. States and corporations are investing in  data infrastructure, erecting regulatory barriers to  cross‑border data flows and treating data as a strategic  asset. The contest over data sovereignty is reshaping  international relations, as countries seek to balance  the benefits of open science with the imperatives of  privacy, security and competitiveness.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

The competition for talent is equally important.  Scientific and technological progress depends not  only on physical resources or infrastructure, but on the  cultivation and attraction of the skilled researchers,  engineers and innovators whose expertise animates  the entire system. The global circulation of talent is  both an opportunity and a vulnerability: attracting  leading minds can accelerate national progress,  while losing them can undermine long-term  competitiveness, since the tacit knowledge embedded  in professional networks and collaborative research is  difficult to replicate or replace. As a result, restrictions  on academic exchanges, tighter visa regimes and  concerns about “brain drain” have become prominent  features of the geopolitical landscape.

With science and technology becoming a new axis  along which geopolitical power is exercised, the global  research ecosystem is undergoing fragmentation.  Where international collaboration once drove scientific  progress, suspicion and strategic competition now  threaten to silo knowledge and capacity. Export  controls, national security reviews and regulatory  barriers have made cross-border partnerships  more difficult, particularly in sensitive domains  like AI, quantum computing, and biotechnology.  The result is a world in which scientific knowledge  and technological capacity are increasingly  compartmentalised, with actors seeking to secure their  own advantages while guarding against the risks of  dependence on others.

This fragmentation is further complicated by the  layered nature of technological systems. Technologies  rarely exist in isolation: they form complex “stacks”  of mutually reinforcing capabilities. This means that  while some actors may focus on controlling specific  choke points, others invest in building broad, resilient  technological bases that can provide alternative  pathways around bottlenecks. For example, faced   with the above-mentioned export bans and  bottlenecks in chip fabrication, China has launched  programmes spanning research, education, subsidies  and domestic procurement, aiming to build an  independent, end-to-end chip ecosystem — seeking   to develop homegrown, redundant and diverse  sources across the full supply chain.
<<<END_PAGE_216>>>

<<<PAGE_217>>>
Others are following suit in attempting to bypass  bottlenecks. For example, Brazil, which holds the  world’s second-largest rare‑earth reserves, is rapidly  developing 27 rare‑earth projects to establish an  independent supply chain of these materials, which  are essential for high-tech. India, meanwhile, has  launched the $10 billion Semicon India programme,  offering major subsidies to attract both domestic  and global semiconductor companies. The interplay  between these strategies creates a dynamic landscape  in which vulnerabilities and opportunities are  constantly shifting.

Looking ahead, the role of science and technology  as a factor in geopolitics will probably grow more  pronounced. The search for new choke points will  continue as technology evolves, as will efforts to build  resilience through diversification, redundancy and the  cultivation of domestic talent and data ecosystems.

Governance in this new era presents formidable  challenges. Traditional, top-down approaches may  struggle to keep pace with the rapid, decentralised   and often unpredictable nature of technological  change. More adaptive and experimental forms of  governance will be needed — ones that can respond  quickly to emerging vulnerabilities, recalibrate  strategies in real time and foster the kind of innovation  essential for resilience.

Ultimately, control over science and technology  has become a decisive factor in geopolitics, one  that is closely intertwined with a broader struggle  for dominance. Success in this environment will  depend not only on the ability to identify and exploit  choke points, but perhaps more importantly on the  capacity to adapt, innovate and collaborate in the  face of constant change: the (ab)use of choke points  will continue strengthening incentives for states  and companies alike to find alternative economic  and technological ecosystems. Substantial effort will  probably go into mapping and shedding light on  the economic networks binding the world together,  probing for potential vulnerabilities, and assessing   how best they could be mitigated. Those who can  secure the flow of data, attract and retain talent,   and build flexible, resilient technological systems  will be best positioned to shape the future of the  international order.

213

213
<<<END_PAGE_217>>>

<<<PAGE_218>>>
SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

214

4.1 4.1

Science-based Diplomacy

CO-CHAIRS:   Didier Wernli

Associate Professor at the Global Studies Institute  and the Department of Computer Science at the  University of Geneva, Switzerland

Roland Bouffanais

Associate Professor at the Global Studies Institute  and the Department of Computer Science at the  University of Geneva

CONTRIBUTORS:   Örjan Bodin, Lars-Erik Cederman,  James Hollway, Rak Kim, Rafael Mesquita,  Hannes Müller, Christopher Rauh

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

The “scientification of diplomacy” is based on  interdisciplinary work between global governance,  international relations, international law,  computational social sciences, mathematics,  optimisation theory and behavioural research.   It covers different emerging fields of research,  such as computational diplomacy and negotiation  engineering.

Computational diplomacy, for one, is concerned  with our emerging ability to map the landscape of  international relations, to gather and analyse data  on unprecedented scales and to simulate potential  outcomes. This has transformational potential for  diplomatic activity. For instance, efforts have already  begun to plot the networks of influence between  actors on an international scale and to use artificial  intelligence to mine the large databases of texts  relating to historical negotiations and international  organisations. As such, computational diplomacy  is revealing not only the complexity of modern  international relations but the potential knock‑on  effects of future actions, giving opportunities to  favour the emergence of desired outcomes. It also  allows actors to better understand the history of  negotiations and how changes in language reveal  movements in position, and to reduce uncertainty  in formulating plans.

Negotiation engineering, on the other hand,   is a solution-oriented approach to negotiation  problems that uses quantitative methods in a  heuristic way to find an adequate solution.   The approach draws on breaking down and  formalising the problem(s) at hand and on the  heuristic application of mathematical methods   such as game theory and mathematical  optimisation. In this way, it can contribute to  recognising feelings and better managing them  during the negotiation process, as well as allowing  for resolutions of more complex real-world issues.
<<<END_PAGE_218>>>

<<<PAGE_219>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

Researchers from a wide range of academic  disciplines are collaborating to improve  approaches to diplomacy through applying  numerical and computational techniques as well  as AI. Computational diplomacy, for instance,  can exploit existing data to better understand  past diplomatic achievements and the network  structures that facilitated them. Also of interest  is Negotiation engineering, which is being  transformed by AI techniques and raises the  possibility that future agreements will be informed  by computationally derived understanding  and will more successfully bring together  broader groups of stakeholders in complex  negotiations, while allowing progress with fewer  missteps. Similarly, Predictive peacebuilding has  potential to use machine-learning approaches  to increase the chances of achieving greater  international stability. Trust and cooperation  modelling applies computational approaches  to the task of establishing relationships that  result in positive experiences of cooperation and  collaboration experiences while providing tools for  distinguishing trustworthy from untrustworthy  potential partners.

4.1 	 Science-based Diplomacy

SUB-TOPICS

4.1.1	 Computational diplomacy

4.1.2	 Negotiation engineering

4.1.3	 Predictive peacebuilding

4.1.4	 Trust and cooperation modelling

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

The Anticipation Potential scores of the topics  covered by Science-based Diplomacy are relatively  similar. The main variable driving the scores is the  uncertainty of future developments of the related  fields. Predictive peacebuilding rates slightly higher  because of the perceived positive impact it may have  on society in the future.

MORE INFORMATION

go.gesda.global/sci-dip

215
<<<END_PAGE_219>>>

<<<PAGE_220>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

216

Science-based Diplomacy

4.1.1

The world of diplomacy is rich in data. The United Nations and other  international forums have detailed records of debates, speeches and  negotiations going back decades. Then there are databases recording  demographics, trade, finance, spending and common declarations made  by international organisations. Beyond these forums, important sources  include records of human rights violations and other data used by  international justice organisations.

The cost of processing this data means it has not been well used to inform  the process of diplomacy, to amplify cooperation and to improve outcomes.  Nevertheless, organisations like the UN, the World Bank and other  policy‑makers are working hard to integrate quantitative methods into their  organisations, which will accelerate the practice of computational diplomacy  and its use of big data, machine learning and computational thinking.

There is much low-hanging fruit here. The networks of actors on the  international stage and their institutional relationships are already beginning  to be mapped,1,2,3 giving a deeper understanding of the connections that  can influence negotiations. Also being mined for insight are resolutions  adopted by various international organisations. Relevant examples include the  United Nations General Assembly and Security Council resolutions histories,4  sponsorship data5 and debate themes, as well as the resolutions adopted by  the World Health Organization.6,7 This work is beginning to deliver quantitative  results, a crucial step for reproducibility.8,9,10

Much more can be done. Combining a data-driven approach with  computational modelling can facilitate a more fundamental understanding  of how multilateral governance systems work and how they can be improved,  for example.11 The growing use of AI is likely to have a significant impact here,12  but developing the multidisciplinary expertise that can manage and exploit  diplomatic processes is a significant challenge.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Computational diplomacy

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Higher-education  establishments broaden  skill sets for scientists  and diplomats

Efforts to build capacity  for computational  diplomacy bear fruit  in the form of an  increased range of  courses and training  programmes across  relevant disciplines, and  in understanding of  how disciplines can be  integrated as mutually  supportive frameworks.  Predictive modelling  improves at the sub- national level with AI  systems providing  natural language  translations of model  outputs.

Computational techniques  uncover new insights into  multilateralism

Computational diplomacy  leverages advances  in natural-language  processing, network  science and time‑series  analysis to uncover  new insights into the  structure and dynamics  of multilateralism. By  analysing diplomatic  discourse, institutional  networks and temporal  patterns, the field will  enable data-driven  operationalisation of the  study of cooperation,  influence and legitimacy.  This will support the  emergence of a dynamic,  systems-oriented  understanding of global  governance.

Computational diplomacy  reshapes international  relations as a science

The successes with   text mining and other  data-driven applications  allow experts to create  a robust theory of  diplomacy that makes  testable predictions  and creates useful  frameworks for  diplomatic interactions  and for improving  understanding of  international relations.  Predictive forecasts  become a ubiquitous  tool for policy-makers,  who will know in  advance the effect of  their actions and how  they may inflame or   cool tensions.
<<<END_PAGE_220>>>

<<<PAGE_221>>>
Science-based Diplomacy

4.1.2

Negotiation engineering uses quantitative methods in a heuristic way to  find an adequate solution to a set of complex negotiation problems. In doing  so, it particularly draws on the decomposition and the formalisation of the  problems at hand and the heuristic application of mathematical methods,  such as game theory and mathematical optimisation, to reach agreement.13

This approach could help to reveal the ingredients of success for global  cooperation. Numerous non-governmental organisations in complex  networks currently aim to solve complex problems such as climate change  and the challenges related to Sustainable Development Goals. And yet they  often achieve far less than they hope. A better understanding of the way  organisations should interact to achieve specific goals could change this.

Negotiation engineering has already achieved a number of practical  successes. For instance, in the diplomatic sphere, the approach played a  crucial role in the land transport agreement between Switzerland and the  European Union, and in facilitating nuclear talks between Iran and the P5+1  group of nations.14

Negotiation engineering does not intend to replace face-to-face discussion  and neither does it seem likely to ever do so. It may in some cases also have  limited application: not all problems are quantifiable or should be reduced  to a quantitative level. However, in case a negotiation involves problems with  a particular degree of complexity and actors with a certain level of analytical  capacity open to a rational approach, negotiation engineering can allow for  more logical accuracy in finding pragmatic solutions while building trust  between mediators.

The availability of negotiation tools powered by AI has triggered a  transformative period in negotiation engineering. These tools are helping  human negotiators become more effective and has kick-started a new era  of automated negotiations with their own strategies and characteristics. This  evolution is paving the way for a greater exploration of the strategy space and  the development of new negotiation theories that encompass and extend  established theory.15,16

Negotiation engineering

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Capacity-building  accelerates negotiation  engineering

The automated  processing of  text to make it  machine‑readable  leads to more advanced  models of areas of  conflict. This allows  stakeholders to map out  and discuss potential  futures before deciding  on a course of action.  The exploration of  negotiation strategies  using AI leads to widely  available and expanded  toolkits that can be used  at every level of society.

Mathematical thinking  focuses international  discussions

A new generation of  scientists currently  being trained in the  grammar of computer  science and in diplomacy  become influential  in the diplomatic  world. This leads to an  increasingly wide variety  of international actors  applying mathematical  methods to their  negotiation problems to  help focus discussions  and to make potential  outcomes more logically  accurate.

Negotiating standards  increase thanks to  mathematical approaches

Automated negotiations  using AI become  common in the  commercial world and  on the international  stage. This leads to  more sophisticated  deal‑making —  and more devious  deal‑breaking.  Mathematical skills  are common in  positions of influence,  allowing negotiation  engineering to become  a standard tool in many  negotiations.

217
<<<END_PAGE_221>>>

<<<PAGE_222>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

218

Science-based Diplomacy

4.1.3

Predictive peacebuilding uses data science to better understand the roots  and warning signs of conflict in order to predict where it is likely to occur  and to help develop mitigation, preventative and rebuilding strategies.17

The field has been bolstered by a number of successes, particularly with the  application of AI techniques.18 For example, machine-learning-based analysis  of newspaper text can predict the onset of conflict, becoming particularly  useful when risk in previously peaceful countries arises.19,20 Analysis of food  prices shows that increases beyond a threshold level are correlated with civil  unrest in many parts of the world.21 Granular, actor-based conflict data22,23  gives rise to models that take it into account.24,25 The ability to model migration  patterns on a global scale using anonymised Facebook data is also   a significant step.26

Research in the field sees policies for conflict prevention — mediation,  development aid, institutional reform and building state capacity, for  example — as a prediction policy problem.27 This means that the treatment  effects of different policies and the targeting of these policies in time and  space both need to be studied quantitatively. However, important limitations  and potential pitfalls remain. Current conflict models have limited ability  to make causal inferences and are sometimes informed by outdated  data‑gathering.

Even more serious is the possibility that predictive models can be   self‑fulfilling or self‑defeating. For example, a prediction of war could cause  local populations to flee, raising tensions that themselves trigger conflict.  Also, care is needed in defining peace and ensuring that “peaceful” outcomes  make a difference to the lives of real people such as refugees and those who  have experienced trauma. Understanding these kinds of questions requires  granular data gathered on a vast scale to inform decision-making and the  cost‑effective use of resources.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Predictive peacebuilding

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Computer models map  potential outcomes

Advanced models of  areas of conflict allow  stakeholders to map out  and discuss potential  futures before deciding  on a course of action.  Causal inference and  prediction models are  increasingly integrated  and able to exploit new  data on armed conflict,  impacts and policies.

Individual data-gathering  creates new peacekeeping  tools but raises serious  issues of privacy and  exclusion

Researchers begin to use  a wider range of data,  such as anonymised  mobile-phone data,  to study the potential  for conflict. They lobby  for accountability for  social‑networking  companies, who can  now explicitly see when  activity on their sites  is fuelling unrest. The  real-time nature of  some data-gathering  exercises raises issues of  privacy and exclusion of  those without a digital  voice, which need to be  addressed. At the same  time, models appear that  take into account the  impact of peacebuilding  on people’s lives.

Climate change and conflict  increases use of peace  modelling

As pressures from  climate change increase  and civil unrest becomes  common in some parts  of the world, the use of  predictive peacekeeping  models becomes a  default response.
<<<END_PAGE_222>>>

<<<PAGE_223>>>
Science-based Diplomacy

4.1.4

Political scientists, sociologists and computer scientists have begun to create  systems in which autonomous agents have to find ways to cooperate by  distinguishing trustworthy from untrustworthy agents. This has been applied  to a wide range of problems, ranging from information-routing algorithms to  online search rankings to recommendation algorithms. But there is a broader  sense in which trust and cooperation studies are useful — in modelling the  way people behave in the groups that make up societies.28

In any society, business or network, the ability to evaluate and then trust  partners is a crucial component of cooperation.29 Applying trust modelling   to the networks of actors at work in the diplomatic landscape has the potential  to better model potential outcomes of discussions, votes and negotiations.

This work comes at a time when the role of trust in broader society has been  thrown into sharp focus by the phenomenon of fake news, manipulated  images and deepfake videos. The diplomatic landscape is powerfully shaped  by the information that flows through it, and false and misleading information  has huge disruptive potential.30

A key emerging issue is the role of AI and how it will be used to understand  and inform multilateral decision-making processes. At the heart of this  question is whether AI systems will become better at interpreting the complex  data fed into them or worse as AI-generated data distorts their view of the  world. The possibility that AI systems could create a kind of artificial truth will  be an important issue for the field.

Trust and cooperation modelling

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

25-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON

Data veracity becomes   a global research issue

The increased  importance of  data‑gathering and  analysis places a  greater focus on data  sources and their  veracity. This leads to  increased research  in data‑verification  research. Managing  trust and reputation are  already battlegrounds  for some actors.

Stakeholders battle over  reputation and trust

Reputation-building  and trust further  become key factors for  stakeholders in a wide  range of data‑gathering  disciplines, ranging from  news organisations to  scientific institutions  and national and  multinational  organisations. AI plays   an increasing role in  these processes.

AI oversees data veracity

Machine vision and  AI become important  arbitrators of trust  in data, news and  images. However, a  cat‑and‑mouse game  continues between  malicious actors and  those attempting to   shut them down.

219
<<<END_PAGE_223>>>

<<<PAGE_224>>>
SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

220

4.2

Economics

CHAIR:   Jayati Ghosh

Professor of Economics in the College   of Social and Behavioural Sciences at   the University of Massachusetts Amherst

CONTRIBUTORS:   Sandro Ambühl, Robert Constanza,   Erika Kraemer-Mbula, Nick Srnicek

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

A number of factors make traditional economic  theories unsuitable for understanding modern  societies. These include unrealistic assumptions  underlying many economic models at both  microeconomic and macroeconomic levels;  inadequate recognition of historical processes  and their current implications; and insufficient  incorporation of power dynamics.1 As a result,  contemporary economic thought is undergoing  a significant transformation, moving beyond  traditional models to incorporate emerging ideas  and understanding about the way (and the context  within which) human societies and individuals have  operated through history and the processes and  mechanisms at work in economies today.

Through integrating a more holistic understanding  of economic history and of the realities of  21st‑century human experience into economic  models and practice, developments in this field  are posing provocative questions and challenging  the very basic definitions on which mainstream  economic theory has been based.

Old ideas that assumed perfectly rational actors  always acting in their individual self-interest to  maximise specific conceptions of utility, for instance,  are being replaced. Behavioural economics  integrates psychological insights to explain how  cognitive biases, social preferences and limited  willpower systematically affect economic decisions.  This field challenges fundamental assumptions  about the behaviour of economic agents and   market efficiency, and has also changed policy  approaches towards “nudges” and changes in   choice architecture.

A significant transformation in the recent past is the  emergence of the knowledge economy, with the rise  of the digital economy and big-data analytics, as well  as emerging AI providing both new insights and new  challenges for economic analysis. Many observers  expect AI agents to rapidly boost productivity in

the short term, while the medium- and long-term  prospects of artificial general intelligence (AGI)  and an AI “singularity” raise concerns about job  displacement and the concentration of wealth.   This is driving a greater focus on questions of   well-being, technological control and wealth  distribution, to ensure that the benefits of such   new technologies are widespread and not confined  to the powerful few.

There is also greater recognition of the global  nature of long-run economic processes and the  ways in which they have generated, reinforced and,  in some cases, reversed inequalities. There are also  moves to integrate knowledge, experience and  expertise from countries and regions that have  been under-represented in the development of  economic thinking. Additionally, the realities of  climate change and biodiversity loss are altering how  experts think about the world’s economic resources  and operations. The interconnectedness of the  human economy with natural systems requires that  economists advocate for sustainable-scale, equitable  resource distribution and efficient allocation within  planetary boundaries.

Research into these issues is already uncovering  many policy solutions that could lead to resilient,  inclusive, sustainable societies. Sustainable  economic policies must also deal with the realities  and implications of climate change. This has led   to forced migration, with all kinds of consequences  on the societies at the origin and the destination.  It has also impacted agriculture through altered  environmental conditions. Our societies also have  to solve issues arising from globalisation and from  automation and its effect on employment before  they cause significant economic changes that lead  to social unrest.
<<<END_PAGE_224>>>

<<<PAGE_225>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

Contemporary economic thought is undergoing  a significant transformation, moving beyond the  traditional, limited models of economic action to  incorporate emerging ideas and understanding  about the way all humans operate in the 21st  century, contextualised with understanding of  the planetary implications of these operations.  Behavioural economics challenges the notion  of perfectly rational individual utility-maximising  actors, integrating insights from psychology to  understand real-world decision-making. The rise  of an Economics of knowledge, supercharged by  AI, is profoundly redefining work, production and  life. Global economics, which aims to recognise  the global nature of economic processes through  history and to incorporate the growing role and  influence of lower- and middle-income countries,  is changing perceptions of how countries develop  and what can be learned about adaptive job  markets and resilience. Parallel to this, Ecological  economics emphasises the interconnectedness  of the human economy with natural systems,  advocating for sustainable-scale, equitable  distribution of assets and incomes as well as access  and control over the products of nature to enable  expansion of economic welfare within planetary  boundaries. All of these areas are interconnected,  requiring the development of a radically holistic set  of economic ideas.

4.2 	 Economics

SUB-TOPICS

4.2.1	 Behavioural economics

4.2.2	Economics of knowledge

4.2.3	Global economics

4.2.4	Ecological economics

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

Survey observations in the field of Economics  highlight that considerable efforts to cultivate more  sustainable and resilient economies are already  under way, largely propelled by the intensifying  climate challenge and significant shifts in the  workplace. Experts foresee an exceptionally high  societal impact from these breakthroughs, with an  even greater influence projected for the environment.  Despite a notable current lack of awareness, the  anticipated profound transformations across  society — expected within the next two decades —  suggest these developments warrant close attention.  Ecological economics emerges with the highest  Anticipation Potential, signifying possible strong  transformative effects on both science and society,  and a clear requirement for multilateral action. In  contrast, breakthroughs in Behavioural economics  are anticipated over a much longer timeline.

MORE INFORMATION

go.gesda.global/econ

221
<<<END_PAGE_225>>>

<<<PAGE_226>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

222

Economics

4.2.1

Behavioural economics is an interdisciplinary field that combines traditional  economic theory with insights from psychology, neuroscience and  sociology. Its aim is to understand how and why people make economic  decisions in the real world.

Because this is now recognised to be a more challenging problem to solve  than was previously acknowledged, the field has had to use a range of models,  recognising that human behaviour is highly context-specific. For instance,  the behavioural biases affecting financial decisions can differ significantly  from those influencing health choices. A surge in empirical studies using  randomised controlled trials and field experiments has sought to understand  decision-making in diverse settings and consider possible interventions.

There has been increasing absorption of behavioural economics into fields  like finance and development economics. This has been further enabled by  the use of big data and AI not only to predict human behaviour but to provide  insights into socio-economic questions related to fairness and redistribution.

Beyond individual-level interventions (the “I-frame”), there is a growing  recognition that systemic changes (the “S-frame”) are also needed.2   While “nudges” can encourage better individual choices, critics warn these  tools can deflect responsibility from powerful players and institutions. Instead,  large-scale societal problems — such as climate change — require regulatory  and legislative solutions on systemic scales. There is also an increasing  acknowledgment of the ethical underpinnings of policy recommendations,  with a focus on understanding what people genuinely perceive as fair.

In essence, behavioural economics is transitioning from merely critiquing  notions of “rationality” and identifying human quirks to actively informing  policy and system design, with an ever-growing emphasis on empirical  evidence, real-world application and a stronger focus on ethics, along with  more nuanced understanding of human values.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Behavioural economics

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Experimental data   informs policy

More randomised  controlled trials and  field experiments reveal  ways to influence human  behaviour, for example  with “sin” taxes for  sugary drinks, but with  greater awareness of  different socio-economic  and political contexts.

Lessons of behavioural  economics become  mainstream

The insights of  behavioural economics  are absorbed into  “standard” economic  theories so that it   begins to disappear   as a separate field.

Appreciation of complexity  brings useful perspectives

More complex  understanding of the  strong links between  economics and other  disciplines leads to  development of a  transdisciplinary and  global perspective to  study economies.
<<<END_PAGE_226>>>

<<<PAGE_227>>>
Economics

4.2.2

The global economy is undergoing profound changes driven by digital  knowledge and the transformational ways it is being used, including  frameworks for privatising knowledge through intellectual property rights  (IPRs) as well as the simultaneous push for knowledge commons and   open-source philosophies. This has pushed the need for the development   of new economic theories for understanding technology, innovation and   the creation and dissemination of new knowledge.

The deployment of AI is among the important shifts. AI is already affecting  the economics of the workplace, with the potential to dramatically increase  productivity in some sectors,3 while displacing various roles.4 Lower- and  middle-income countries, already bypassed by industrialisation, face an even  steeper path if AI takes over both manufacturing and service jobs, especially  if the economic value it creates becomes concentrated in the hands of a few  technology companies and their investors.

Another threat is the possibility of a dangerous AI race without adequate  societal controls, driven by capitalist and geopolitical competition. AI  development is resource-hungry, exacerbating global inequality and  geopolitical tension, and such a race may prioritise rapid development over  safety and environmental concerns like energy and water consumption for  data centres. How governments and transnational organisations protect public  interests in this scenario is an important open question, which will   also require the integration of ecological economics and transnational  economics in determining how the knowledge economy evolves.

All this is forcing economists and policy-makers to rethink traditional  assumptions and ask difficult questions about values, well-being, control  of technology and wealth distribution. As AI transforms the digital and real  economy, the greatest challenge will be to ensure that society acts to ensure  this process benefits all and not just the powerful few.5

Economics of knowledge

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

A new economics   of AI agents emerges

The widespread  adoption of AI agents  dramatically increases  productivity in a few  influential applications,  such as automated  discovery in science.   This leads to the  emergence of a new  economics of AI agents  and AI firms.

Novel welfare systems fail  to match rapid changes in  employment

AI systems become  able to perform any  computer‑based task as  proficiently as humans,  further disrupting labour  markets and economic  structures. The need for  new welfare systems  becomes urgent but the  economics of public policy  must evolve more rapidly  to cope with changes  in levels and patterns of  employment.

AI self-improvement drives  new social contracts

AI takes over its own  innovation process,  leading to self-redesign  and exponential growth  in capabilities. In the  absence of regulation  and social control, this  can drive a dramatic  and unpredictable  transformation of all  aspects of society. This  would create urgent  demand for new social  contracts that address  the fundamental issues  of resource distribution,  purpose and governance  in a vastly different world.

223
<<<END_PAGE_227>>>

<<<PAGE_228>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

224

Economics

Global economics 4.2.3

Traditional economic models have long painted a narrow and often  misleading picture of global development, heavily influenced by Western  ideas and an over-reliance on GDP as the primary measure of progress.  This perspective frequently portrays lower- and middle-income countries,  particularly those in Africa, as needing to “catch up” by adopting what are  seen as established practices, even while ignoring the legacy of colonial  control and global exploitation of nature and people. However, a compelling  alternative viewpoint is emerging: that lower- and middle-income countries  offer a vital new frontier for economic thinking, providing crucial insights  into the future of work, value and societal well-being,6 and the individual  and group behaviours that progressive economic models must capture.

Current economic assumptions, which link growth directly to job creation,  are increasingly challenged by technological advancements like automation  and AI, as well as changes in ecological and planetary conditions that are  associated with growing inequality and more informal economies.   Many low- and middle-income countries have experienced such conditions  for decades, which provides experience that can inform how the global  workforce will evolve and how societies can build resilience against  future shocks. The need to ensure decent and dignified lives and working  conditions in such countries also points to the need for experimentation   with economic policies that go well beyond mainstream perceptions   of growth and development.

In addition, the narrow, monetised interpretation of value in Western models,  exemplified in the concept of GDP as the basic indicator of economic  progress, often overlooks crucial factors such as Indigenous knowledge  systems, community-level practices, ecological health and long-term  resilience. Embracing these alternative perspectives, and coupling them  with interdisciplinary approaches and proactive strategies for sustainable  development, will be crucial for navigating the complex economic landscape  of the future.7

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

25-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON

GDP alternatives gain  wider acceptance

Economists,  policy‑makers and  business leaders begin  to embrace metrics such  as time use, care work,  median wages, working  conditions, food access  and ecological measures  as alternatives to GDP.  Greater investment  in improving data  infrastructure for reliable  and objective metrics in  all countries drives new  understanding of value  creation and the nature  of work.

Global discussions focus   on the experience of  regions like Africa

Scholars and institutions  from the developing  world, especially from  Africa, lead a global  economic discourse on  alternative and more just  and inclusive models of  economic development.  The formal integration of  decolonised economic  indicators is adopted  for national and  international policies.

GDP replaced with more  holistic indicators

Holistic, equity-centred  economic systems  replace GDP-centric  paradigms worldwide.  Indigenous knowledge  and informal-sector  innovations become  mainstream in global  economic thinking
<<<END_PAGE_228>>>

<<<PAGE_229>>>
Economics

Ecological economics 4.2.4

In an era of rapid climate change, understanding how factors such as  biodiversity, changing ecologies and subsequent resource availability will  impact future societies and individuals, and the economics behind their  activities, is becoming more and more pressing.

Researchers and public bodies increasingly agree that economics must change  to serve the long-term well-being of both people and the planet. This will  include breaking disciplinary silos within, and democratising access to, the  subject. In this way, economics can address real-world concerns with real-world  consequences, improving equity, justice and participatory governance.

Ecological economics seeks to play its part here by integrating economics,  ecology, psychology and Earth-systems science to understand the planet from  a holistic systems perspective. With this kind of radical approach, ecological  economics has the potential to create a better future for humanity.

At its core, ecological economics pursues three fundamental goals:  achieving an ecologically sustainable scale for the human economy  within planetary boundaries; ensuring fair distribution of resources across  generations, communities and species; and enabling efficient, equitable  and well‑being‑oriented resource allocation. Its central idea is that humans  are not separate from nature but embedded within it, with nature, societies,  knowledge and built infrastructure all contributing to well-being. The  interactions among these and the limits to substituting one for another are  central to creating regenerative and equitable economic systems.8

It is also important to raise the profile of knowledge from lower- and middle- income countries, especially given the continued domination of institutions  and scholarly work from the Global North in “recognised” academic work,  with associated biases and blind spots. The under-representation of Southern  scholarship, especially in African contexts, is a systemic challenge linked to  power asymmetries in global research.

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Transdisciplinarity goes  mainstream

The growing recognition  that complex global  problems cannot  be solved by single  disciplines drives  the establishment  within universities of  interdisciplinary research  units and collaborations  focused on ecological  economics. Policy  discussions increasingly  incorporate the concept  of planetary boundaries  and the need for a “safe  operating space” for  humanity.

Ecological and social  indicators become  more widely used than  traditional economic  indicators

Nations and regions  prioritise ecological and  social well-being over  conventional economic  indicators.

Natural and planetary  boundaries are enshrined  in human behaviour

International and  national governance  frameworks are reshaped  around the core goals of  sustainable well‑being,  strict adherence to  planetary boundaries  and distributive justice.  Economic arrangements,  institutions and policies  are redesigned to  reflect a shift in the  fundamental goal of  society, from maximising  market economies to  creating sustainable  well-being for all life.

225
<<<END_PAGE_229>>>

<<<PAGE_230>>>
SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

226

4.3

Futures Research

CHAIR:   Sarah Pink

Laureate Professor and Director of Futures Hub  and the Emerging Technologies Research Lab   at Monash University in Melbourne, Australia

CONTRIBUTORS:   Simone Abram, Yoko Akama, Siân Bayne,  Juan Francisco Salazar, Susan Halford,  Jorge Juarez Li, Helen Manchester,  Annette Markham, Minna Ruckenstein,  Yolande Strengers

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Our current situation is often characterised as  a “polycrisis”,1 with converging environmental,  geopolitical and technological crises, and  overwhelming uncertainties.

Modern governments, organisations and businesses  planning for our societal, environmental and  technological futures frequently depend on  forecasting and foresight based on quantitative  modelling, predictive data analytics, scenarios and  expert workshops to inform futures decision‑making.2  Alongside this, claims about the societal impact of  emerging technologies such as AI, the metaverse,  cryptocurrency or space exploration exert a powerful  influence on government policy, organisational  strategy and market investments.3,4 Such claims are  frequently revealed to be ill-founded or motivated  by business interests rather than societal needs, and  their agendas can have damaging consequences.  Existing approaches to such futures have clearly   failed to solve our contemporary challenges and   the polycrisis has prompted calls for more and   better foresight.5

While existing forecasting and foresight methods  provide valuable data, they are limited in scope and  depth, often delivered by consultants or through  foresight “toolkits”. Recent proposals to improve  foresight range from using AI to expand its scale  and speed to calls for an inclusive and decolonising  foresight agenda.6 A social-sciences, humanities and  design approach to futures7,8,9,10,11,12 responds to this  context in: assessing the limits of AI in drawing only on  existing data, possibly unfit for purpose and requiring

careful human guidance;13,14 engaging Global South  perspectives (such as, for instance, on Latam-GPT15  and on generational futures16) and feminist, queer,  disability and racially and socio‑economically minority  community perspectives;17 acknowledging Black18

and First Nations futures;19 and applying theory that  acknowledges uncertainty and the unknown, and  which seeks to shape ethical, realistic and plausible  futures.

To achieve credible, precise and responsible  decision‑making and planning, new foresight which  combines qualitative and quantitative knowledge  is vital. Both approaches have been honed over  decades: quantitative formulas and digital-data  analytics deliver convincing models but miss  the pivotal role of human values and practices,  non‑human species and planetary environments  in defining futures;20,21 and the social sciences,  humanities and design apply new rigour and  inclusivity through methods that account for how  possible futures are shaped and complicated by these  qualitative factors.

For society to benefit from qualitative futures  knowledge it must be visible, recognisable, accessible  and influential in the decision-making sphere. This  means: raising the profile of a new tier of engaged  qualitative futures researchers and knowledge  delivered collaboratively and in partnership with other  disciplines and sectors internationally (governments,  communities and businesses); and sharing accessible  futures reports through scenarios, film-making,  exhibitions and performances.22,23
<<<END_PAGE_230>>>

<<<PAGE_231>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

Anticipating possible futures is critical to policy  and planning for governments, organisations  and businesses, spurring a growing demand for  foresight. Engaged futures scholars across the  Global South and North are delivering a vital new  layer of qualitative Inclusive futures knowledge.  These approaches are designed to inform better  decision-making by bringing qualitative and  quantitative data together to deepen and enrich  insight across multiple sectors. Theories and  concepts for plural futures in social-sciences,  humanities and design futures acknowledge and  address the uncertainty, plurality and contestability  of futures. This enhances our capability to shape  inclusive, realistic and plausible futures through  interdisciplinary, cross-sectoral and stakeholder  engagement. Simultaneously, Innovative and  participatory futures methods increase the  robustness and rigour of inclusive futures research.  Engaged qualitative futures research accounts  for how futures are shaped by qualitative factors,  rather than just relying on quantitative modelling,  predictive data analytics, scenarios and foresight  workshops. There is growing evidence of success  in this approach, but making it available to  stakeholders and decision-makers requires  Accessibility, engagement and action.

4.3	 Futures Research

SUB-TOPICS

4.3.1	 Inclusive futures knowledge

4.3.2	Theories and concepts   for plural futures

4.3.3	Innovative and participatory  futures methods

4.3.4	Accessibility, engagement  and action

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

Futures Research stands at a pivotal point, with  experts anticipating significant breakthroughs.  These will mostly occur within the next five to  ten years, but could be even sooner for specific  areas like the generation of Inclusive futures  knowledge. This dynamic field carries considerable  transformative potential for both science and  technology. Certain future scientific developments  remain inherently uncertain — particularly in  Theories and concepts for plural futures — and  there is a strong requirement for internationally  coordinated action to unlock its full potential.

MORE INFORMATION

go.gesda.global/fut-res

227
<<<END_PAGE_231>>>

<<<PAGE_232>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

228

Futures Research

4.3.1 Inclusive futures knowledge

The mission of engaged futures research in social sciences, humanities   and design is to deliver and mobilise a new layer of inclusive futures  knowledge and foresight.

Advances in qualitative approaches to generating futures knowledge  are uneven across sectors. As we anticipate a shift towards sustainable  clean‑energy futures, the energy sector provides one early example of  successful implementation. This has led to new accountability to human  and societal futures, with benefits in guiding strategy, investment and  development. Companies, governments and multilateral bodies have  historically depended largely on quantitative knowledge derived from  economic forecasts, predictive data analytics and expert opinion to  inform energy scenario-building and decision-making around long-term  investments in costly infrastructure.24 The inability of these methods to  envisage more diverse, inclusive and subsequently realistic and plausible  futures has led to a lack of reliable knowledge and a crisis of the imagination.

In response, social sciences, humanities and speculative design have  produced accessible new qualitative knowledge to guide decision‑makers  who realise the need to attend to and account for social and societal futures  in the energy sector. This new layer of knowledge has both productively  complicated existing assumptions and ensured that the roles of diverse  experiences and agencies in shaping futures are ethically and inclusively  accounted for. For example, researchers have used qualitative research  to revise existing assumptions: where “social acceptance” of energy  technologies or interventions has not worked, energy stakeholders have  been open to new social-science-evidenced concepts of “social readiness”  and “social value”. Other sectors where futures scholars have translated  qualitative futures knowledge to address stakeholder challenges are   related to city data, education, net-zero transition and commercial   product development.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Users acknowledge  the value of qualitative  approaches

The impact of qualitative  futures knowledge  is evidenced as  existing collaborative  initiatives with  industry, government  and public‑sector  organisations  acknowledge its value.  New banks of qualitative  futures knowledge are  established by engaged  scholars.

Qualitative approaches  inform decision-making

The impact of qualitative  futures knowledge  is consolidated and  its benefits reaped  by international  organisations and  agencies who  mobilise it to inform  decision‑making. A  shared international  bank of qualitative  futures knowledge  is consolidated and  continually regenerated.

A bank of qualitative  futures knowledge   is established

Qualitative knowledge  from social sciences,  humanities and design  futures is valued equally  alongside quantitative  and technologically  generated knowledge.  A continually updated  bank of qualitative  futures knowledge  is considered a vital  societal resource and  accessible to all sectors.
<<<END_PAGE_232>>>

<<<PAGE_233>>>
Futures Research

4.3.2 Theories and concepts  for plural futures

Theories of futures are diverse.25,26,27 Technologists and engineers often see  the future as a problem to be solved, for instance — as an incrementally  evolving “better” version of the present, where new technologies can solve  societal problems or where future life will be disrupted by major social,  economic or environmental upheaval, to be solved by building adaptive  capabilities and systems to increase resilience and flexibility. When  decision‑makers adopt these world-views (or varieties of them) they often  inform top-down strategies which may be ineffective or resisted.28

Contrastingly, social scientists, humanities and design research theories from  the Global South and North, and treat futures as emergent, possible, plural,  situated, contingent and not necessarily causal or linear. To embrace the  conditions and experiences of futures aligned with this theoretical perspective  a series of concepts have been proposed and tested. These include (but are  not limited to): uncertainty, trust, hope, anxiety, friction, breakage, repair and  aspiration, desirability and utopia. This framework can be used to ask how  emerging technologies might be reshaped by the agency of people who use  them in society and what this implies for realistic and plausible community  futures; or how ethical futures might be shaped when plural preferred futures  exist in society, for example in the present dialogue relating to just transitions to  net zero-carbon emissions. Often these challenges cannot be solved by linear  theories of futures, where technology is thought to simply impact on society   or where building adaptive systems is assumed to lead to resilient societies.

Bringing social-science theories and concepts to bear on technical and system  solutions can improve our ability to develop plausible, realistic and ethical  solutions and achieve goals of inclusive and just futures.

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Qualitative, quantitative  and technical disciplines  collaborate

Social-science  theories of futures as  uncertain, plural and  non-linear moderate  the assumptions of  engineering and systems  theories to better inform  futures decision-making.  A flexible suite of  interdisciplinary futures  concepts facilitates  collaboration between  qualitative, quantitative  and technical disciplines.

Interdisciplinary theories  drive decision-making

Interdisciplinary theories  of futures, attentive  to social-science  perspectives, drive  futures decision-making.  This is supported  by a dynamic set of  interdisciplinary futures  concepts designed  to account for the  intersection of humanity,  environment and other  species and technologies  in shaping futures.

Just, sustainable and   digital futures arise

The benefits of  mobilising social‑science  theory in an  interdisciplinary futures  framework is clearly  visible as, for example,  just, sustainable and  digital futures come   into view.

229
<<<END_PAGE_233>>>

<<<PAGE_234>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE

PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

230

Futures Research

4.3.3 Innovative and participatory  futures methods

In recent years a new suite of qualitative futures methods has been  developed by methods innovators in the social sciences, humanities   and design.

Qualitative methods innovations tackle the challenge of enabling diverse  participants to imagine futures beyond those promoted in dominant  narratives.29,30,31 They include: futures-ethnographic techniques where  participants are invited to experience and imagine possible futures in situ   in their homes or cities (for instance); place-based methods to co-design  and reimagine community futures playfully; carefully curated design futures  workshops which employ speculative devices such as futures mapping,  “thing ethnographies”,32 and generative AI provocations;33 futures card decks;  speculative reverse engineering; and futures storytelling and narrative.34,35  The outcomes of these methods include: new accounts of possible future life;  provocative personas that challenge dominant assumptions about people;  and alternative scenarios and narratives developed with ethnographic  evidence that centre voices of those often neglected in imagining futures.36

These qualitative innovations are complementary to existing forecasting  and foresight methods and designed to build important relationships and  continuums between qualitative and quantitative methods. For instance, the  richer, deeper insights that qualitative futures methods produce have been  integrated with existing large-scale, quantitative techniques by ensuring  surveys include innovative questions derived from in-depth ethnographic  and speculative research to validate and reproduce findings at scale.   Such approaches can also be used to expose blind spots in prevailing  thinking and open up new lines of inquiry.

Qualitative futures methods have had success across social science,  humanities and design research focused in, for example, the energy  sector, net-zero transitions, education, ageing societies,37,38 Indigenous  self‑determination, disaster preparedness and city data futures.39   However, these new methods are not familiar in many of the domains   where futures thinking and decision-making are currently practised.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Innovative methods  gain traction

Innovative qualitative  social-science,  humanities and design  futures methods  are valued as a go- to approach for  delivering vital futures  knowledge. A first  cohort of early‑career  researchers is trained as  initial capacity-building  initiatives come to  fruition.

Deep interdisciplinarity  becomes the norm

Interdisciplinary  futures teams  always include social  scientists in research  and methods design;  futures social‑science  methods courses are  delivered in universities  alongside a new tranche  of interdisciplinary  futures education  and professional  development.

Educational and  professional spheres  embrace new approaches

Interdisciplinary futures  mixed-methods  design, development  and education and  training are established  in educational and  professional spheres  and continue to evolve  to address emerging  challenges and  knowledge needs.
<<<END_PAGE_234>>>

<<<PAGE_235>>>
Futures Research

4.3.4 Accessibility, engagement and action

As the international profile, visibility and potential of social-science,  humanities and design futures expertise is consolidated, it is becoming  available to an expanding circle of decision-makers and professionals  across sectors and industry, government, not-for-profit and international  organisations. Concurrently a new generation of qualitative futures  researchers is being trained globally to employ and deliver futures theory,  concepts, methods and knowledge, making them accessible to other  disciplines and stakeholders.

A growing body of clear and accessible qualitative futures knowledge is  freely available, backed up by the scholarly integrity and peer review which  ensures its quality and rigour. Report series have been carefully designed to  communicate accessible findings to industry partners in energy, older-care,  construction, mobilities, city and other sectors.40 Creative storytelling,41 comic  strips, workshops,42 documentary films,43,44,45,46,47,48 exhibitions or speculative  objects and online games49 have been developed. Often co-created with those  at stake, these creative works make possible futures present and participatory  in tangible and experiential forms, and have been shared across diverse  audiences. These formats acknowledge the plurality of Global South and  North “futurisms” to be accounted for (for instance including feminist futures,  Afrofuturism,50 posthumanism and environmental futures). Integrating social- science futures knowledge and theories makes visible the power relations and  ethics of shaping futures with diverse communities.

Next steps involve bringing qualitative and quantitative knowledge into closer  dialogue to deliver powerful new foresight for decision-makers to cite as the  basis for action.

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Qualitative futures reports  achieve widespread  acceptance

Qualitative futures  reports and creative  media are the go-to  resources for futures  knowledge. A first cohort  of early-career social  scientists is already  trained in the scholarship  and in accessible  communication and  engagement.

Creative outputs are  commonplace

Fully integrated  interdisciplinary  reporting and  creative‑practice outputs  are commonplace  resources developed  to support futures  decision-making across  sectors. A mature cohort  of interdisciplinary  communicators  ensures their findings  are disseminated  across academic and  stakeholder settings.

Social and human  dimensions of futures  decision-making are  mainstream

The benefits of qualitative  futures knowledge  in interdisciplinary,  institutional and public  decision‑making are  widely recognised:  academics,  decision‑makers  and publics alike are  advocates for the  social and human  dimensions of futures  decision‑making.

231
<<<END_PAGE_235>>>

<<<PAGE_236>>>
SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

232

4.4

Digital Security

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

CHAIR:   Linus Gasser

Lead Engineer in the Center for Digital Trust  (C4DT) at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology  in Lausanne (EPFL)

CONTRIBUTORS:   Thomas Bourgeat, James Diggans,  Jean-Pierre Hubaux, Miroslaw Kutylowski,  Shujun Li, Sébastien Marcel

The world of the 21st century is increasingly reliant  on digital technologies, creating a slew of challenges  for tasks, processes, institutions and individuals  that require privacy, transparency and security in  all their various forms. A number of mathematical  and technical innovations, such as zero-knowledge  proofs, trusted execution environments,  homomorphic encryption and advances in formal  verification are improving the prospects of creating  effective digital-security measures.

However, the practice of digital security still faces a  range of theoretical and practical challenges in the  face of numerous emerging forms of computing and  communication. At the heart of these challenges is  AI, which is dramatically increasing the capabilities  of both defenders and attackers in cybersecurity. At  the same time, the “internet of things” is extending  its web through every aspect of human society,  from transport and industry to healthcare and  entertainment. By some estimates, there will be 100  billion devices connected to this network by 2050.1  That raises a host of security issues on a scale never  before seen. Next-generation telecommunications  networks based on 6G technologies will also need to  be secured, as will biological information. Then there  is the health, financial and personal data stored in  the cloud that must be processed without revealing  its content. And if that were not enough, the next  decade will see quantum computing coming  online with the computational power to crush  some existing encryption systems. Securing these  systems will be a significant task and developing the  mathematical foundations to guarantee this security  will be even tougher.
<<<END_PAGE_236>>>

<<<PAGE_237>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

Thanks to increases in private, institutional and  governmental activities in the digital sphere,  there is a growing need for reliable and practical  digital-security solutions. Privacy and security  are fundamental to democracy, economic  activity, communications and healthcare  delivery, but there is also a need for transparency  in these activities, depending on the context.  Researchers are developing a range of solutions  for establishing, protecting and verifying Digital  identity, with a growing use of biometric data  offering particular challenges and opportunities.  Novel encryption technologies are coming onto  the market, although technological progress  is necessarily slow here, and the prospect of  emerging quantum‑computing systems able  to challenge some of the most widely used  encryption methods is creating some legitimate  concern about whether encryption can stay ahead  of encryption‑breaking operations. Many of these  concerns might be allayed through development  of better and more wide-ranging Formal  verification protocols, which provide reliable  mathematical modelling of real-world capabilities  and scenarios.

4.4	 Digital Security

SUB-TOPICS

4.4.1	 Privacy and security

4.4.2	Digital identity

4.4.3	Novel encryption technologies

4.4.4	Formal verification

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

Digital identity and Privacy and security are very  much under the spotlight today. Research in these  areas is expected to see significant developments  in the coming five years. Formal verification  technology breakthroughs are further away and will  be less transformative. Digital identity is the area  with the highest scope for action, highlighting the  need for coordinated international involvement.

MORE INFORMATION

go.gesda.global/dig-sec

233
<<<END_PAGE_237>>>

<<<PAGE_238>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

234

Digital Security

4.4.1 Privacy and security

Issues of privacy and security now affect all citizens, as well as state-level  operations. The pervasive use of digital technology means that, for an  equitable society, personal data and communications have to be encrypted  in ways that allow transactions and access to services such as welfare  payments, healthcare and voting facilities, as well as private web-browsing,  messaging and mobile-phone use. This requires a vast technological  infrastructure that is not only efficient and secure, but also — depending on  the context — private yet transparent. At issue is the confidentiality, integrity  and availability of information as well as related concerns over authenticity,  accountability and reliability. There is also the inevitable trade-off between  privacy and system functionality that individuals must navigate, which often  brings into focus tensions between the way people think about privacy and  the way they act.2

New technologies are also raising security and privacy issues. Video analysis  can reveal an individual’s identity and location but also the people they  meet, their mood and even certain medical conditions. The transmission and  storage of biometric data requires the implementation of new protocols, and  the increasing prevalence and accessibility of a wide range of biology‑based  data (such as genomic information, healthcare data and access  protocols for laboratory samples of weaponisable pathogens) means that  “cyberbiosecurity” is an emerging research topic of significant importance. AI  is also changing this landscape,3 not least because of its pattern-recognition  capabilities and the potential it offers to automate many tracking processes.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

AI cybercrimes change  focus of security

AI is used to encourage  people to use IT systems  without employing  proper security  measures. A handful of  spectacular cybercrimes  demonstrate the role  of AI in exploiting  weaknesses in  conventional security  systems. The issue  focuses the global  security community on  whether and how to  control AI as well as how  to balance citizens’ rights  with public safety.

Augmented reality redraws  privacy boundaries

Malicious state-level  cyber-activity becomes  so damaging for privacy  and security that it  forces an expansion  of the definition of  cyberwarfare. That lowers  barriers to conventional  war while raising  the stakes for digital  diplomacy. Growing  activity in the metaverse  focuses security research  onto the challenges of  privacy and safety in  immersive environments.  Awareness-raising about  abuse of data-sharing  causes individuals to take  more control of their  personal data, as well as  protect themselves with  more use of multifactor  authentication.

Tension grows between the  digital haves and have-nots

Countries with secure  digital infrastructures  experience significant  growth in their  knowledge-based  economies, often at  the expense of digital  privacy. But countries  without this capability  suffer economic  hardship, and the  division dramatically  redraws the global  balance of power.
<<<END_PAGE_238>>>

<<<PAGE_239>>>
Digital Security

4.4.2 Digital identity

One of the most difficult digital-security problems is to create ways for  establishing digital identities that are useful in a wide range of applications  but remain secure. This will mean consideration of indirect insecurities,   such as LGBTQ+ people being unwillingly identified because of data-sharing  leading to openly targeted advertising,4 doxing5 or even physical attacks.  Identity security relies on data policies and software routines as well   as on “unlinkability”6 and secure hardware implementations such as   “secure enclaves”. It is likely that unlinkability will allow people to maintain  several legitimate identities simultaneously, for example. Multifactor  authentication is used now, but its importance is likely to grow, with  distributed and independent issuers of factors making identity theft   much harder than it is today.

Reliable means of establishing identity will be key as autonomous agents  begin to augment people in certain decision-making scenarios. These agents  will need their own identities that are securely linked to their owners.   This kind of distributed decision-making raises broader issues about the   way human identity will evolve in future. What’s more, establishing the identity  of machines is an important issue for the “internet of things”,7 which consists  of devices with limited power, network and computational ability. Identity in  this context will have to be established by methods that do not rely on strong  encryption, network connections and so on. Ensuring that these mechanisms  are secure and fit for purpose is an ongoing area of study.

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

AI identity theft  threatens democracy

State-sponsored AI  cybercrime combines  the data from multiple  security leaks to produce  convincing patchworked  identities for large- scale fraud. This theft  occurs on such a large  scale that it threatens  banking systems,  healthcare and even  democracy. Passwords  become a rarely used  means of authentication,  replaced by passwordless  approaches. Autonomous  agents trade on their  owner’s behalf using  networks of verifiable trust  that occasionally, through  unpredictable herding  behaviour, create runs on  certain types of goods,  leading to shortages and  profiteering. Encryption  protocols such as PGP   and SPKI flourish.

The notion of personal  identity mutates

The notion of one  identity per person  begins to change with  the legitimate use   of multiple IDs.   This creates diverse  social landscapes,  with the opportunity  to segment an online  existence to share  different parts of life  with different groups  of people. A new breed  of security attack via  the internet of things,  particularly medical  devices, poses a life- threatening risk for  millions of people.

Establishing and protecting  identity becomes routine

Identity-authenticating  technology is developed  in ways that allow  even young children  and technology- disadvantaged  individuals to establish  and protect their  identities.

235
<<<END_PAGE_239>>>

<<<PAGE_240>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

236

Digital Security

4.4.3 Novel encryption technologies

The science of hiding information by encrypting it to prevent unauthorised  access faces a wide range of new challenges. Among the most significant  is the advent of big data, stored in the cloud, that needs to be processed  securely. This has led to much work on homomorphic encryption8,  which allows encrypted information to be searched and processed while  remaining encrypted. Applications include healthcare, banking, voting,  genome encryption and beyond. Zero-knowledge proofs allow data  verification without revealing anything about the data itself9 and have  applications in healthcare, electronic identity systems, arms verification  and so on. Another challenge comes from quantum-computing systems,  which are soon expected to become capable of breaking many public-key  cryptographic systems that are in widespread use for communication,  financial transactions and the like. The US National Institute of Standards  and Technology is coordinating efforts to develop post-quantum  cryptographic standards that will be immune to quantum attack.10   But much work needs to be done to make sure they are safe.

The “internet of things” is a network expected to connect over 40 billion   devices by 2025,11 but there are significant challenges in achieving this securely.  These devices operate with lower power and with limited computational  resources, which limits the data processing they can do. Ongoing research for  securing the internet of things focuses on blockchains, physically unclonable  functions and post-quantum cryptography. Many of these techniques require  improvements, such as error-detection routines and practical, user-friendly  hardware interfaces. Device-independent cryptography, where users can test   a device’s security for themselves, removing any reliance on manufacturer- issued assurances, remains an important goal.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Secure cloud search  revolutionises healthcare  research

Homomorphic  encryption techniques  allow researchers to  process data stored  in the cloud without  revealing its content.  This leads to significant  advances in fields such  as genomics where data  privacy is a key concern.  However, other security  weaknesses that allow  malicious users to access  the data via well‑known  shortcomings threaten  to undermine the  potential. Basic-level  data, such as DNS traffic,  is routinely encrypted.

Post-quantum encryption  widely adopted

A relatively small  number of quantum  computers become  capable of breaking  public-key encryption.  This forces the  widespread adoption  of post-quantum  encryption, although  some of the adopted  encryption methods  are likely to be broken.  Simple, lightweight  cryptography gains  in popularity, but the  environments that adopt  a hybrid approach, using  two or more encryption  systems with very  different characteristics,  are the most secure  against attack.

Genome security   improves

Homomorphic  techniques allow the  risk posed by a given  nucleic-acid sequence  to be assessed without  the whole sequence  being read, protecting  IP while facilitating trade  and transfer of biological  materials.
<<<END_PAGE_240>>>

<<<PAGE_241>>>
Digital Security

4.4.4 Formal verification

A crucial component of modern security systems is the task of proving  their correctness with respect to a specification, a process known as formal  verification. This requires accurate mathematical modelling of hardware  designs, along with their envisaged operations, and then an exhaustive,  systematic check of all model states in a way that can offer evidence of  security. While formal verification is an essential part of the development  process, in practice it is often applied in retrospect, which makes the task  significantly harder. Simpler user interfaces and better techniques could  help to change that. That’s particularly important for mobile computing   and cloud computing, which have spurred the use of formal verification   at earlier stages in associated platform development.

Other new types of computing introduce their own challenges for formal  verification. The “internet of things”, for instance, connects a wide variety of  devices together and to the internet using a variety of different technologies,  communications protocols and security standards, rendering each one  vulnerable to attack — especially since they are often installed by non-security  experts.12 6G communications networks, which are being designed as open and  programmable by multiple stakeholders, may be vulnerable to attack in ways  that 5G networks are not.13

Because of the trend towards ever-larger and more complex networks and  systems, formal analysis is becoming more difficult, and AI — in particular, its  pattern-identification capabilities — will play an increasingly important role  in formal verification routines. However, low-end devices are likely to benefit  from advances in local verifiability and public verifiability protocols, which will  be of particular use in small and medium-sized countries where traditional  certification is not affordable and tools for trustworthy certification (and  suitably qualified personnel) are not available.

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Formal verification  becomes more visible

The trend towards  demanding explanations  for how AI makes  decisions also drives  wider demand for  verifiable security,  and observation of  “ceremony” in processes  such as key generation.  AI accelerates the testing  and verification of  software and hardware  systems, but relatively  few companies or  organisations have this  capacity, creating a  threat of monopoly.

Verification methods   for biological systems   spark debates

Formal verification  methods for biological  systems emerge that  allow a full analysis of the  capability of synthetic  organisms before they  are made and released  into the environment.

Quantum computing  introduces new challenges  for verification

The challenge of  verifying quantum  software using quantum  techniques drives new  research into formal  verification based on  the laws of physics  themselves.

237
<<<END_PAGE_241>>>

<<<PAGE_242>>>
SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

238

4.5

Behavioural Science  of Groups

CHAIR:   Mina Cikara

Fredric Wertham Professor of Law and Psychiatry in  Society, Professor of Psychology and Director of the  Intergroup Neuroscience Lab at Harvard University

CONTRIBUTORS:   Laia Balcells, Sabina Čehajić-Clancy,  Eran Halperin, Yphtach Lelkes

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Equipped with the tools of modern research, it is  becoming possible to identify, monitor and predict  how individuals cohere into groups, and how those  groups behave and interact with each other — to  assess collective emotion as well as collective action.

Efforts to understand conflict and cooperation have  long been dominated by notions of history and  geography. Attempts to avert or encourage conflict  have been couched in terms of the diplomatic crafts  of discussion and negotiation, staged under the aegis  of (supposedly) neutral and multilateral organisations.  Such efforts have had notable successes in the  post-war era, but also notable failures. Great-power  conflict has been avoided, but there have been  numerous instances in which the established order  has collapsed unexpectedly and abruptly.

The traditional tools of politics and diplomacy have  proven increasingly impotent in the face of such  challenges, particularly as the environment has  become ever more complicated by technology,  migration, climate change, polarisation and  partisanship, rises in both secularism and religiosity,  and geopolitical realignments. However, new tools  have also emerged from the fast-developing science  of group behaviour, which aims to understand the  deep-seated reasons behind the formation and  activity of distinct groups.

The availability of granular data is particularly  significant in this respect. For example, mobile‑phone  data allows researchers to monitor individuals’  movements, interactions and information diets; this  data can then be cross-referenced with their social  and political activity, and aggregated into groups  of any relevant scale or scope: nations, societies or  communities, demographic segments and ethnic  groupings, and so on.

The point of this activity is to understand how groups  interact and particularly how they might come into  conflict. Today’s efforts are more often geared towards  resolution — trying to stop conflict once it has already  begun — rather than prevention. New methods of  monitoring both top-down forces (such as messaging  from elites or economic trends) and bottom-up  trends (prevailing social attitudes) are changing this,  potentially allowing conflict to be anticipated.   This should in turn allow interventions to be made in  a more optimised fashion, suitable to the particular  context and circumstances of an emerging conflict,  rather than applied generically. This is a young field,  however, and there is still much systemisation,  experimentation and validation to be done.
<<<END_PAGE_242>>>

<<<PAGE_243>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

Modern research tools, especially computational  resources, are making it possible to analyse  the various aspects of group behaviour. This  holds promise for enhancing cooperation and  limiting conflict, as well as understanding the  basic dynamics of how groups form and behave.  Particularly useful are Data-driven models  of collective behaviour, which can achieve  unprecedented insights into the hidden drivers of  observed behaviours. One of the most sought-after  applications is in Predicting the onset of armed  conflict. This will, in tandem with the Optimisation  of interventions, give governments and global  organisations the tools to mitigate the harm  that intergroup conflicts bring to individuals and  societies. Optimising all these actions depends on  their Interaction with wider global trends such as  climate change and access to burgeoning digital  communication technologies, which affect the way  group behaviours manifest and evolve. MORE INFORMATION

4.5	 Behavioural Science  of Groups

SUB-TOPICS

4.5.1	 Data-driven models  of collective behaviour

4.5.2	Predicting the onset  of armed conflict

4.5.3	Optimisation of interventions

4.5.4	Interactions with wider  global trends

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

The Behavioural Science of Groups has a high  overall Anticipation Potential score. It is an area at  the convergence of disciplines that will accelerate  advances and their impacts in the future. The scope  for action is also high for all sub-topics considered.  Predicting the onset of armed conflict and  Interactions with wider global trends score highly  because of higher impacts and because the fields  are relatively new.

go.gesda.global/beh-sci

239
<<<END_PAGE_243>>>

<<<PAGE_244>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

240

Behavioural Science of Groups

4.5.1 Data-driven models of  collective behaviour

Historically, researchers seeking to understand collective behaviour have  been limited to comparatively simple models — for example, those based  on correlations between the prices of basic foodstuffs and the likelihood  of civic disorder.1 But the increased availability of continuous data about  movements, communication and interactions makes it possible to develop  more refined models and test them against real data — a “bottom-up”  approach focused on aggregated individual behaviours in addition to forces  acting “top-down”.

For example, analysis of 1.2 billion mobile-phone pings in South Africa reveals  that contact with a larger number of immigrants predicts more xenophobic  attitudes and voting patterns. However, this effect is less pronounced if there  are repeated casual interactions with the same members of the out-group.2  Another “top-down” example is the use of AI to categorise the way political  leaders use language, thus revealing whether voters are hearing constructive  debate or personal attacks.3

Data is not a panacea, however: there can be significant communities who are  poorly represented in available data — for example, those who are not digitally  connected — or hard to identify, such as those who are covertly resistant to  autocratic regimes. And all the data in the world is of little use without the  appropriate techniques for analysing it. These analytic approaches do not  necessarily exist within the traditional social sciences and will need to be  adapted and further developed in collaboration with specialists from other  disciplines, such as physics and evolutionary biology.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Useful datasets expand

The datasets available  for analysis continue  to expand — including  increases in resolution  (more precise records)  and types of data   (such as biometric  data). This will require  cooperation between  data collectors and  researchers, along with  codes of conduct to  ensure appropriate  ethical and commercial  oversight.

The behavioural-science  research environment  matures

Integrated,  cross‑disciplinary teams  become the norm in  behavioural science,  incentivised by a new  wave of journals, funding  opportunities and  research organisations.  Specialised analytical  tools that draw  on existing data  competencies are  developed but reflect  the particular concerns  and idiosyncrasies of  social science.

Data reveals sources   of collective phenomena

Widely accessible,  extremely granular  data becomes routinely  available for analysis. This  is used to understand  how collective  behavioural phenomena  result from cascading  collective dynamics at  the individual, group and  societal levels and how  these relate to the social,  economic, ecological and  political environment.
<<<END_PAGE_244>>>

<<<PAGE_245>>>
Behavioural Science of Groups

4.5.2 Predicting the onset of armed conflict

The 21st century has provided ample evidence of the far-ranging effects   of armed conflict. Beyond the obvious toll of immediate death and  destruction, the interconnectedness of today’s world means there can   be significant political, economic and social repercussions far from the  fighting. As such, predicting conflicts — with the aim of preventing them —  is a stated objective of organisations such as the United Nations and   World Bank.

This is not simple. It is easy to identify places whose social order is fragile or  which are geopolitically exposed, but much more difficult to determine if and  when this will tip into conflict, especially in countries with a long previous  history of peace. Attempts are now being made to do this using machine  learning, which recognises patterns in data to predict likely outcomes.  However, this requires massive amounts of data. One such effort, for example,  uses systems trained on millions of news articles dating back to the 1980s.4

Purely data-driven approaches, however, may or may not map onto prevailing  theories of conflict escalation or outbreak. Nor do purely data-driven  predictions offer any guidance as to the potential form of any intervention.  Finally, there is also the inherent problem that any publicly disclosed  prediction can itself influence the course of events by affecting public  sentiment or government decision-making, or by making transparent the  thresholds at which intervention becomes likely. Additionally, the use   of large datasets in conflict areas raises potentially thorny questions related   to surveillance and the potential misuse of data by combatants.

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Machine-learning  models improve  conflict‑risk detection

The continued  development of  machine-learning  models and other  data‑driven systems  helps to improve  detection of increased  risk of conflict. The  models are validated  against historical and  current experience to  prove that they produce  accurate predictions of  the effects of conflicts  and any interventions  made to prevent them.

“Explicable” machine  learning facilitates better  understanding of conflict  prediction

The development of  explicable machine- learning systems allows  their predictions to  be better understood.  Integration with  theoretical models  that capture top‑down  forces (such as  communications from  political elites) helps to  refine predictions and  shape interventions.  The first real-world  interventions (partially)  based on such  predictions occur.

Conflict-prediction  models adopted by  global organisations

Endorsement and  adoption of these  approaches by  global multilateral  organisations, and  development of  accompanying  ethical and practical  frameworks to ensure  that predictions instil  confidence rather than  hastening conflict and  that interventions are  timed and designed to  respect the autonomy   of those affected.

241
<<<END_PAGE_245>>>

<<<PAGE_246>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

242

Behavioural Science of Groups

4.5.3 Optimisation of interventions

Many instances of conflict stem from the deterioration of intergroup  relations: one community or bloc begins to mistrust another, leading to  reduced cooperation and overt frustration, which ultimately becomes  outright antagonism. In response, social scientists have formulated  interventions that aim to improve such relations by reducing bias, hostility  or negative behaviours. This approach has had some success, as measured  by improvements in key psychosocial variables such as trust and inclusivity.

However, this has also highlighted the need to optimise interventions for  particular contexts. Interventions may be categorised by what they hope  to achieve, how they hope to achieve it and how they can be delivered, but  this needs to be supplemented with greater consideration of precisely what  attitude or behaviour they are targeting, who they are trying to reach and how  effectively they can be delivered within a particular operating environment.  They also need to account for the level at which they operate — of individuals  (for example, education), groups (exchange programmes) or societies  (anti‑discrimination laws).5

To achieve this, there will need to be greater structure and cross-disciplinary  collaboration in the design of interventions. Perhaps most importantly, any  research efforts will need to be developed and delivered in collaboration with  local community leaders and citizens. Interventions at one level can have  effects at different levels (anti-bigotry museum exhibits can encourage social  mixing, for example) and over different timescales. They can also interfere  with each other. That means they need to be carefully implemented in a way  that allows them to be compared on a more systematic basis. Evaluation will  need to be comprehensive and holistic (with great sensitivity to the possibility  of unintended consequences), and geared towards practical solutions rather  than improvements in some relatively abstract social variables.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

“Intervention science”  matures

Continued development  of intervention science  aims to create repeatable,  context‑sensitive  approaches to  intergroup conflict, in  collaboration with local  community members  and with an emphasis on  demonstrable real-world  effectiveness, backed  up by new sources of  funding.

Careful deployment   of interventions begins

Interventions are  deployed after careful  assessment of particular  actors (leaders who  may exploit them, for  example) and contexts  (which may affect delivery  and efficacy), while also  recognising their mutual  interactions to ensure  net benefit. Researchers  move even more toward  collaborating with  cultural institutions  (museums, for example)  and municipal leaders  to inform the broader  community about  conflict narratives  and opportunities for  community investment.

Refined, customisable  interventions improve  intergroup relations

A full taxonomy of highly  refined interventions can  be deployed to improve  intergroup relations,  customised to particular  circumstances and with  full understanding of the  appropriate timing and  targeting for maximum  effect.
<<<END_PAGE_246>>>

<<<PAGE_247>>>
Behavioural Science of Groups

4.5.4 Interaction with wider global trends

Several megatrends are changing how intergroup conflict plays out.   The changing climate, for instance, alters the viability of some lifestyles  while opening up new ones — pastoralism versus mining in the Arctic,   for example.6 The superpower face-off of the late 20th century has  given way to a new, more multipolar environment in which nations may  simultaneously collaborate and compete, or enter into new alliances   and alignments. These factors are causing significant changes in global  mobility and thus leading to novel intergroup interactions.

Combined with greater interconnection, this allows people to find and build  common cause with others with whom they might previously have shared little  affinity or even mutual awareness. This creates new groups which may span  geographies — for example, climate activists engaging in stochastic disruption,  or the formation of new political blocs. Conversely, it can lead to competition   for resources, whether real or perceived, and friction over cultural norms.   These consequences might equally arise from forced migration away from  poorer countries as from lifestyle tourism into them. State actors may also  exploit these trends, for example through online propaganda or proxy conflicts.

Overlaid on all these factors are the effects of digital communication,  particularly those mediated by opaque algorithms. This can lead to distorted  perceptions about both social opportunities and threats, including the  motivations and intentions of others. Across contexts and cultures, overly  negative “meta-perceptions” make people believe the worst of the other side  and encourage support for hostile actions against them. Dramatic increases in  polarisation suggest this is an increasing problem. Corrective information can  de-escalate hostility, however, and engender a positive shift in attitude.

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Research develops solutions  to disinformation

Techniques to “inoculate”  people against  disinformation and  malign online activity  designed to foment  conflict are developed  and delivered at various  points through both  formal and informal  education programmes.  These techniques must  be simultaneously  developed alongside a  push for greater support  of publicly funded  media and sources of  information.

Migration creates  novel interactions

Climate change  becomes a major  driver of migration,  leading to more novel  interactions. Rather than  impoverished migrants  seeking to improve their  economic fortunes,  wealthier emigrants  move away from fragile  geographies.

Research facilitates  addressing global  challenges as they arise

The megatrends  described above have  become entrenched,  as have their mitigants  and other responses.  Further challenges  arise as environmental,  economic and  geopolitical drivers  continue to evolve.   But half a century of  group behavioural  science means that they  can be addressed far  more systematically   and effectively.

243
<<<END_PAGE_247>>>

<<<PAGE_248>>>
SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

244

4.6

Language and   Communication

CHAIR:   Jennifer Culbertson

Professor in the Centre for Language Evolution and  the department of linguistics and English language,  University of Edinburgh, UK

CONTRIBUTORS:   Damian Blasi, Federico M. Federici,  Ryan Nefdt, Carmen Saldana, Kenny Smith,  Antonella Sorace, Simon Townsend, Yossi Yovel

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

The emergence of language was probably a key  factor in the tremendous success of our species  and potentially represents a unique evolutionary  step in the history of life on Earth. While abilities  like tool‑making and planning have proved to  be widespread in the animal kingdom, complex  languages that convey rich, unbounded meanings  through structured recombination of elements  appear not to be found in any other species.

However, many human languages are under  threat and are likely to become extinct within  decades.1 There is an urgent need to preserve and  document these languages, both for the sake of the  communities who use them and because without  them we cannot fully understand the human  capacity for language. We have the opportunity to  harness new technologies like AI in service of these  goals.2 Linguistic diversity is a driver of creativity and   a valuable source of information about human  culture, history and psychology.

Scientific and technological developments operate  within complex social and political contexts,  making them fundamentally entangled with  questions of power, identity and social hierarchies.  Our understanding of language and the cognitive  systems that underpin it are shaped by assumptions  and world-views as much as by empirical observation.  The science of language demands critical reflection  on the researcher’s position within broader systems   of knowledge production.

This is especially true in an age when significant  progress in the development of large language  models (LLMs) has made human interaction with AI  an everyday occurrence, at least for a select few.   These developments have many applications, both  practical and theoretical: however, the ways in which  they will impact human culture and language are  unknown. Some of these may be positive: LLMs may  help find ways in which languages can be preserved  and revitalised in real-world scenarios. They may help  us to answer long-standing questions about how  language is learned and represented in the human  mind. However, disparities in access may exacerbate  existing inequalities. Models of cultural evolution also  point to possible challenges, including model collapse  due to the increasing prevalence of LLM-generated  text on the internet.

This picture is likely to become even more complex,  as we are seeing unprecedented levels of internal  and international migration due to conflicts, the  impact of natural hazards and socio-economic  factors. There is a consequent rise in multilingualism,  particularly among younger generations, together  with a decline in intergenerational transmission  of minority or minoritised languages. Life in an  increasingly multilingual environment provides  opportunities for establishing positive new social  identities and connections but also raises questions  about “belonging” and “identity”, and necessitates  the development of research-informed policies  concerning language education and use.
<<<END_PAGE_248>>>

<<<PAGE_249>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

Research on language and communication  enables us to understand a core human capacity,  which impacts us as individuals and shapes our  societies. Recent advances in large language  models (LLMs) have opened up new frontiers in  the study of Machines and language, shedding  light on how languages can be learned and how  human communication might be influenced by  interaction with AI. At the same time, these models  can be used to develop technologies that support  linguistic diversity at a critical moment in human  history. Emerging technologies, together with rich  datasets, are also expanding our understanding  of Communication beyond language, from whale  vocalisations to birdsong. Understanding the  structure and content of these systems will lead to  new theories of the evolutionary origins of human  language, including how it emerged in our species.  In parallel, New empirical and experimental  methods are helping to resolve fundamental  questions about why human languages look the  way they do, how children and adults learn and  use diverse languages, and how languages change  over time. Language change is in part driven by  social change, and our languages form a core part  of our social identity. New research is shedding light  on Multilingualism — the norm for most human  societies — including how multilingualism relates  to systems of oppression, how multilingual societies  are impacted by language policies and how being  multilingual may bring cognitive benefits.

4.6	 Language and   Communication

SUB-TOPICS

4.6.1	 Machines and language

4.6.2	Communication beyond language

4.6.3	New empirical and experimental  methods

4.6.4	Multilingualism

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

Language and Communication is an evolving  field, with significant advancements anticipated.  Sub‑topics such as Machines and language,  and New empirical and experimental methods,  demonstrate particularly strong transformative  potentials and are expected to reach maturity in  the next five years. While there remains inherent  uncertainty regarding future breakthroughs in  researching Communication beyond language,  there is a strong requirement for internationally  coordinated action to fully harness the capabilities  of these emerging communication paradigms.  Such collaborative effort is also crucial for  advancing Multilingualism and exploring its  wider implications for scientific and technological  progress. Breakthroughs in these two last sub-topics  are thought to be a decade away.

MORE INFORMATION

go.gesda.global/lang

245
<<<END_PAGE_249>>>

<<<PAGE_250>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

246

Language and Communication

4.6.1 Machines and language

Emerging technologies like AI have considerable potential for improving  our understanding of language and by extension the evolution of human  cognitive capacities.3

Large language models (LLMs) now achieve high accuracy on many  language‑related tasks.4 While they are built on neural networks,5 LLMs have  a completely different architecture to that of the human brain.6 Nevertheless,  by exploring their capabilities and comparing their behaviour with that of  humans, we may gain insights into the mechanisms by which languages  are learned,7 including how our minds infer the structures and rules of a  language.8 If this bears fruit, the result will be improved theories of language  and of the relationship between language and other high-level cognitive  capacities:9 for instance, the degree to which complex reasoning depends   on language.10

A key future goal of AI models is to increase their multilingual coverage,  including “under-resourced” languages, where training data is often sparse.13

If this is achieved, a key goal should be to leverage LLMs to document and  preserve endangered languages,14 and to revitalise those languages that are  under-represented on the world stage and online.15 For instance, improved  retrieval technologies could be used to create collections of readable texts,  which are currently unavailable for many languages.16

Computer models of language, including LLMs, can also shed light on how  and why languages change over time — an inevitable process that happens to  all languages. Research in cultural evolution shows that successive generations  of language users implicitly shape their language,17 for instance making it both  easier to learn and more useful for communication. Building scaled-up models  of communicating agents can help us answer questions about the effects of  individual-, group- and population-level dynamics on this process.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Machine language  influences human language

The influence of  machine-generated  text online becomes  detectable in the speech  and writing of humans  in Western societies.  Improved understanding  of tokenisation and  other aspects of model  architecture and training  enable improved  multilingual performance.  LLMs achieve higher  performance with less  training data on some  linguistic tasks, showing  the limits of purely  data-driven language  learning and where more  specialised biases may be  required. Tools for analysis  of LLM representations  lead to significantly more  explainable models.  Existing linguistic theories  are refined in light of  these developments.

Machine language   becomes ubiquitous

There is widespread  evidence for  machine‑preferred  words and constructions  in human-generated  texts, prompting new  approaches to avoid  model collapse in  future generations  of LLMs. Quantised  language models, which  compress much of the  information from LLMs  into smaller models,  lead to improvements in  one-shot learning and  generalisation, including  between languages.

New machine-language  architectures are developed

New architectures that  reduce the chances of  model collapse improve  machine-to-machine  communication.  Linguistic theories are  refined and extended  to encompass artificial  natural languages.  Multimodal AIs allow  human-like complex  reasoning.
<<<END_PAGE_250>>>

<<<PAGE_251>>>
Language and Communication

4.6.2 Communication beyond language

All living things communicate, including plants and insects. While the  richness and complexity of human language appears to be unparalleled,  there are animals that have communication systems which incorporate  some language-like elements. Relevant examples come from birds  (especially songbirds),18 cetaceans19 and great apes.20 Recent research   has focused on structural similarities. For example, distributional semantic  analysis suggests that bonobo calls show “compositionality”,21 a key feature  that enables open-ended communication in language.

The increasing availability of rich field data is allowing researchers to  make rapid strides in analysing animal communication, and data analysis  tools including machine learning have the potential to help unravel the  communication systems of a plethora of species in the coming years.22   While AI can be used to generate signals such as fruit-bat sound sequences,   it is an open question whether communication with animals will ever become  feasible.23 Improvements to our understanding of animal signals already has  clear practical implications: tracking changes to animal calls in real time can  help us understand how animals adapt to environmental change and provide  an early-warning sign of declining ecological health.24

Studying diverse animal communication systems, their cognitive and genetic  underpinnings, and the social and environmental contexts that support them  will drive new theories of how our own communication system — language —  evolved. For example, vocal learning is one of the key capacities that underlie  our complex language and is being studied in a range of animals including  elephants and bats.25 Finally, there are growing attempts to understand the  specific cognitive and neurological constraints that prevent non-human  animals from developing language.26

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Structure and form of  animal communication  better understood

Research achieves an  improved understanding  of the structural  complexity of vocal  sequences in a number  of well-studied species,  including primates,  cetaceans and birds,  revealing the degree  of overlap with human  language. Integrated  datasets reveal how  vocal communication  is combined with  other systems such as  gestures. Automated  systems help scientists  decode basic emotional  states such as valence  and arousal in some  animal calls.

AI generates calls that  convey meaning

AI generates animal  calls that convey  meaning, enabling  communication with  some animal species  in some contexts.  Comparative research  begins to capture the  breadth of animal  communication  strategies and  regularities. Detailed  descriptions of the social  and ecological drivers of  complex communication  and language are  achieved, improving  theories of language  evolution. Technological  developments enable  investigation of the  neurobiological basis  of communication in  animals. Bioacoustic  recordings monitor  animal adaptations to  changing environments.

Neuroscience gives insight  into animal communication

Historical and  developmental  datasets of animal  communication become  available and are used  to compare signal  transmission and socially  driven change in a  variety of animal species.  Improved understanding  of signal meanings  facilitates research  on the impacts of  interaction with human  communities and of  environmental change  on animal societies.  Communication with  animals expands in a  variety of modalities,  including vocal, chemical  and visual.

247
<<<END_PAGE_251>>>

<<<PAGE_252>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE

SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

248

Language and Communication

4.6.3 New empirical and  experimental methods

The past decade has seen the development of new methods to investigate  how language is learned, produced and interpreted, and to simulate how  languages change as they are transmitted between users over time.   In addition, we now have access to much larger and richer spoken- and  signed-language corpora than ever, as well as large-scale databases  documenting a wide array of linguistic features across many of the world’s  languages. These have led to improved empirical coverage and better  theories of language. We are now in an excellent position to determine with  more confidence the commonality of different linguistic patterns across the  world’s languages and to explain these cross-linguistic trends. For example,  there is evidence across a variety of domains that certain common patterns  of word and morpheme order are cognitively privileged.29,30,31

English remains over-represented, especially in experimental and corpus data,  with known impacts on the generalisability of our theories.32 Many languages  are under-resourced or at risk of extinction.33 There is an urgent need to collect  more natural and experimental data for such languages, taking care to be  sensitive to the ethical challenges such research can sometimes carry.34

Making sense of such large and diverse datasets will necessitate better  theoretical models and computational methods. If carefully interpreted,   large language models (LLMs) may offer insights into psychological and  cognitive processes supporting the human capacity for language learning.39  For instance, experiments can be performed by systematically withholding  certain types of data from LLM training sets,40 or even by using synthetic  participants, fuelled by LLMs, which simulate the behaviour of humans   in studies.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Research tools gain  depth and breadth

Researchers gain larger,  higher-quality and  more diverse linguistic  datasets, with improved  geographical and cultural  representation. Linguistic  experimentation  becomes less dependent  on the lab thanks to  portable tools and  virtual experimental  environments.  Neuroimaging with high  temporal and spatial  resolution, paired with  psychophysiological and  behavioural measures,  assists our understanding  of the cognitive  aspects of language.  Machine‑learning tools  are developed to analyse  increasingly complex  data.

A much greater diversity  of data is gathered and  generated

Linguistic datasets  have much greater  inclusion of context  and factors such as  history and culture, and  other population-level  differences. Research  provides lightweight  and non-invasive tools  for neuroimaging and  psychophysiological  measurements, and  high-resolution probing  of cortical and subcortical  areas becomes possible.  More inclusive AI systems  allow researchers and  communities to support  under-resourced,  minority and endangered  languages. AI systems  are used to generate new  hypotheses for research.  A new suite of models  tracks population history  using language data.

Datasets become globally  representative

Researchers are able   to draw upon a globally  representative dataset  of living, dormant and  extinct languages.  Accurate AI-enabled  translation software is  able to rapidly decode  a more general class  of languages, allowing  rapid incorporation of  new languages upon  exposure. Models are  developed that can  predict how a language  will change given  specific pressures.
<<<END_PAGE_252>>>

<<<PAGE_253>>>
Language and Communication

4.6.4 Multilingualism

Speaking two or more languages is commonplace and has probably   been the norm for much of human existence.42 In contrast, monolingualism  is a relatively rare state. We now know that multilingualism does not  interfere with children’s language acquisition,46 can facilitate learning  additional languages,47 increases connections between people and their  culture48 and may have positive impacts on other cognitive capacities,   such as perspective-taking and executive function.49,50

Research clearly documents the positive impacts of multilingual education  policies that encourage and maintain the use of students’ mother tongue   in both primary and secondary schools.54

A key challenge is to understand how people learn multiple languages,   and thus improve language-learning outcomes, particularly in adults.   There is ongoing debate about whether there is a “sensitive period” after which  language learning becomes substantially impaired.58 However, recent evidence  suggests that native-like outcomes are possible even up to adulthood.59

Notably, the empirical data on second-language acquisition involves an   over-representation of English, and more reliable methods of measuring  vocabulary and grammatical knowledge in multilingual children and adults   are needed.60

The limits of adult language-learning abilities across diverse settings remain  poorly understood. Likewise, it is crucial to better understand how learning   a second language affects the first one, a process commonly called “attrition”,  which can nevertheless be seen as a normal change due to language contact.61  There is also an emerging field exploring how multilingualism interacts with  neurodivergence.62

Importantly, researchers are now developing new metrics of multilingualism.63  These seek to capture more nuance in people’s ability to communicate across  language barriers: for instance, measuring subtle gradations in fluency.64

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Understanding of  multilingualism becomes  more nuanced

The gradients and  heterogeneity of  multilingualism across  societies are better  understood. Researchers  gain further insights  into the impacts  of multilingualism  on language  use and broader  cognition. Changes  to language‑learning  abilities across the  lifespan are more fully  documented.

Timelines of language  acquisition are clarified

Definitive evidence  from more diverse  samples of languages  and learners confirms  (or denies) the reality  of a sensitive period for  language acquisition.  The relationship between  neurodivergence and  multilingualism is better  understood. The impacts  of technologies such as  the internet, social media  and AI on multilingualism  become clear.

Multilingual policies and  technologies are developed

Improved data and  models capture the  relationships between  mass migration,  social identity and  multilingualism.  Long-term impacts  of language policies  promoting minority and  minoritised languages in  high-migration societies  are documented.  Improved language  technologies facilitate  multilingual language- learning in adults.

249
<<<END_PAGE_253>>>

<<<PAGE_254>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

PULSE OF SCIENCE SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

250 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

INVITED CONTRIBUTION:

The world needs   a new diplomatics

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-IC-4-1

Wiebke Denecke

S. C. Fang Professor of Chinese Language and  Culture, and Professor of East Asian Literatures,  at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
<<<END_PAGE_254>>>

<<<PAGE_255>>>
Diplomacy is a ubiquitous practice of communities  in contact. It is a vital catalyst of the human  experience across time and space. Today the  “Westphalian system” dominates diplomatic  practices. It emerged from the “peace of  Westphalia” that concluded the Central European  Thirty Years’ War in 1648 and relies on concepts of  the sovereignty of nation states, of rigid territorial  boundaries and of contractual means of diplomacy.  Related practices spread throughout the world  with European hegemony and colonialism.

But current concepts and practices of diplomacy are  increasingly failing us. How do we govern in an age  where digital advances are upending established  notions of sovereignty, space and authority? In the  face of global challenges that require thoughtful  collective action, traditional Westphalian models   of international politics are increasingly inadequate.  We need to fully grasp that diplomacy is a  phenomenon that far exceeds its everyday meaning  for citizens as a remote realm of foreign policy and  distant decisions about war and peace. Instead,  it is the most vital vector for humans’ individual  and collective growth and progress. It makes and  breaks human and planetary flourishing; it brokers  knowledge exchange and trade, and the spread of  philosophies, religions, sciences and technologies  that can enable better and more fulfilling lives for   the greatest possible amount of people.

We need a new compass for human and planetary  flourishing. We cannot flourish without a new  diplomatics that empowers us to re-connect to  ourselves, each other and the rich diversity of social,  political and educational institutions that variously  mediate people’s life in different regions of the world.

Diplomatics (or “diplomatic” in British English) is  different from diplomacy. It is an academic field  whose original remit was ascertaining the creation,  form and authenticity of charters and diplomas  issued by royal and papal chanceries in early modern  Europe. Inspired by this traditional field and its  emphasis on diplomatic trustworthiness, we should  create a new academic field of diplomatics as a  tool designed to support human and planetary  flourishing. Diplomatics should create new global  knowledge that draws on fields ranging from history  to political science, neuroscience to philosophy,  psychology and economics, and anthropology and  sociology to studies of the world’s major regions.

Our new diplomatics deploys three vectors for  research and impact. First, formulating a theory of  diplomatic intelligence, which extends a person’s  analytic and logical skills to include other social  and emotional talents that humans and societies  require to flourish — such as effective emotional  self-regulation and self-awareness, interpersonal  communication skills, stress and conflict resilience,  complex decision-making, leadership skills, and,  most of all, pursuit of values that serve the common  good. Second, gathering historical wisdom on the  best strategies furthering human flourishing from  the histories of the world’s societies in deep time and  space and the rich diversity of diplomatic concepts  and practices they have developed and tested  over millennia. And third, designing strategies for  renewing trust in the people, institutions and media  that connect us locally, regionally and globally —   a pressing task in the age of fake news, cyberwarfare  and the deeply fragmented and polarised social  realities we currently inhabit.

251
<<<END_PAGE_255>>>

<<<PAGE_256>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

PULSE OF SCIENCE SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

252 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Diplomatic intelligence requires people to rise from  the individual and interpersonal level to value-based  actions that serve communities, societies and even  states. It has deep philosophical anchoring in what  humans do best, rooted in our species’s gregarious  nature as the Aristotelian “social animal” (ζῷον  πολιτικόν), the Confucian “superior person” (junzi 君子)  or the “perfected human being” (al-insān al-kāmil   )لماكلا ناسنإلاin Islam. All of these embrace “serving the  common good” as part of “individual fulfillment” —  and are at odds with the idealised “rational agent”,  supposedly acting autonomously only out of  self-interest and independently of any relational  considerations, which is still assumed by most  scholars in economics, political science or sociology.

Training humans’ diplomatic intelligence takes   time and effort, for sure. It requires individual effort  and the efforts of surrounding communities and  institutions. However, leaving them untrained results  in self-centred “rational agents” who will ultimately  be unable to fully flourish as humans, along with  many other species, on this planet.

A central skill of diplomatic intelligence is projecting  and building trust, often across difficult borders.  Legal documents are necessary but not sufficient.   A new diplomatics will uncover new global  knowledge about the strategies developed by people  in various cultures and time periods which furthered  peace-brokering, enhanced knowledge exchange  (rather than just trade) and encouraged productive  symbiosis. Philologists, historians, archaeologists,  anthropologists, political scientists, sociologists,  economists and in particular experts in the history  of diplomacy and in knowledge fields such as law,  science, art, religion, literature and music need to join  hands to create a repository of successful practices of  diplomacy and human interaction from world history  that can transform the inefficient treaties-and-law- based models that reign our current world.

Consider East Asia’s Sinitic world: for more than two  millennia Korea, Vietnam and Japan participated  in a system of tribute missions to each others’  courts, while also paying obeisance to the Chinese  emperor. These in-person visits, involving hundreds  of participants, provided ample opportunity for  paying respect and building trust, with the envoys  respectfully delivering state letters on highly scripted  ritual occasions. But most of the lengthy missions  were spent exchanging cutting-edge knowledge  across a broad variety of scientific fields, meeting  “foreign” people along the road, sharing meals and  banquets — and writing poetry for each other.

The envoys couldn’t communicate in a shared spoken  language but conversed in “brush talk”, writing back  and forth in East Asia’s lingua franca of classical  Chinese. Consider one of the ten of thousands of  poems composed on these occasions, this one from  a “good-will” mission in 1719 that Chosŏn Korea  sent to Japan to celebrate the accession of a new  shogun, Tokugawa Yoshimune. A Korean embassy  member had written a poem on a beautiful fan as  a gift for their Japanese host, a local official hosting  the banquet. The host, Wada Masatane, graciously  replied:

豈惟詩句秀   How amazing, your lines of poetry!

運筆墨痕明  So brilliant your calligraphy, as you wield your brush.

賴對雞林客  Sitting across our guests from [Korea],

初聞大雅聲  We first hear the sounds of their “Great Odes”.
<<<END_PAGE_256>>>

<<<PAGE_257>>>
This is not a work of literary genius, but it is a brilliant  deployment of diplomatic intelligence for the benefit  of peaceful relations. You generously praise the other  for something they care about — here it is good  Chinese-style poetry and calligraphy. You paint a  scene of togetherness: sitting together at a banquet,  sharing a meal and drinks. You show respect and  understanding of their history and culture, evoking  an age-old name of their country. You evoke a shared  past, thereby projecting a shared future: the “Great  Odes” are a section of the Chinese Classic of Poetry  (ca. 600 BCE), which here project shared values of  Confucian statecraft and civilisation. The overall effect  is to cast Japan and Korea as being in happy regional  symbiosis under Chinese (Zhou) leadership.

This is diplomatic intelligence in action, just as we  need it today: creating visions of a shared future in  the midst of challenging realities. The nomination  document for a corpus of texts and paintings from  the missions between Japan and Korea between the  17th and 19th centuries explicitly argues that this form  of diplomatic interaction, cemented by trust‑building  through shared meals, time, knowledge, painting  and poetry, secured an unusually long peace  between Japan and Korea during this period.

Even if simplistic causal relations are hard to draw,  these are the kinds of strategies we need to unearth  from our records of human experience in deep time  and space. The MIT Global Humanities Initiative is  now prototyping a new diplomatics with strategic  partners such as GESDA through the Comparative  Diplomacies for Global Governance project. This  seeks to revitalise diplomacy by integrating historical  insights with innovative practices, creating a  more adaptive and inclusive approach to global  governance. We aim to diversify diplomatic  practices for the 21st century, shaping actionable  frameworks for policy‑makers to promote sustainable  strategies that address the challenges of global  interdependence, rampant protectionisms and  transactional relations.

By engaging academic, political and diplomatic  stakeholders we aim to bridge gaps between  established political frameworks and emerging  global needs. The goal is to foster equitable  collaboration, inform policy-making and leadership  training, and empower individuals and communities  to actively participate in solving today’s pressing  challenges. Ultimately, by promoting the power of  diplomatic intelligence and developing accessible  tools, we hope to reduce public cynicism, inspire   trust in diplomatic processes and empower  individuals and communities to engage with and  address today’s grand challenges.

253
<<<END_PAGE_257>>>

<<<PAGE_258>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

254 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

INVITED CONTRIBUTION:

Affirmative ethics   and the new humanities

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-IC-4-2

Rosi Braidotti

Distinguished University Professor Emerita at  Utrecht University, the Netherlands
<<<END_PAGE_258>>>

<<<PAGE_259>>>
How can the human and social sciences —   the humanities — respond to the wide-ranging  transformations in our understanding of what  it means to be human in a post‑human age?  By post‑human I mean a time in which the  non‑linear intersections of advanced technologies,  fast environmental degradation and rising  socio-economic inequalities are converging.  It is a challenging time, full of threats but  also opportunities: within advanced capitalist  economics, we find ourselves in a changing world  order where capitalism no longer necessarily  coincides with liberal democracies. Furthermore,  the intersection of acute climate crisis and species  depletion on the one hand, and the enhancement  of all living entities, human and non-human,  through technological mediation on the other  hand, brings to the fore the tensions of both  post‑humanism and post-anthropocentrism.   We are living through the decentring of “man”,   both as the referent for all humans and as   the dominant species.

While prophets of doom abound and multiply,   over the last decades the humanities have proposed  constructive critiques of the hierarchical structure  of thought that supports the Eurocentric ideal of  “man” as the allegedly universal measure of all things.  Key motors of these productive lines of critique are  feminist,1,2 decolonial and Indigenous studies,3,4   and environmentalism,5,6 which criticise species  hierarchy and anthropocentric exceptionalism.   The post‑human convergence brings these different  lines of enquiry into new focus and urgency. Critical  and creative at the same time, these interrogations  of the limits of humanism and anthropocentrism are  inspirational sources to redefine what may become   of “humans” in the post‑human era. These critical  areas of study have also impacted the profile and  function of the humanities in a globally linked,  ethnically and culturally diverse, socially divided   and technologically mediated world.

My argument assumes a preliminary consensus  about this set of fraught conditions as constitutive  of the post‑human condition, due to the impact  of technological mediation upon all living entities,  driven by artificially intelligent infrastructure and  self-learning, collaborative networks. These advances  cannot fail to impact on human consciousness, our  self-understanding and the way humans interact  with one another, with non-human entities and with  the technologies themselves. They also have the force  to dramatically alter the knowledge foundations of  traditional academic disciplines. This is felt especially  in the field of the humanities, where the question  “what do you mean by human?” has acquired greater  urgency than ever.

The contemporary humanities have reacted with  courage and imagination to the challenges of the  post‑human convergence, expanding into new fields  of research and enquiry. They have become quite  popular as the environmental humanities, the   digital humanities, the biomedical or neural and the  public humanities, to mention just a few. I simply  refer to them as new humanities, knowing that their  number is growing by the day.7,8

255
<<<END_PAGE_259>>>

<<<PAGE_260>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

256 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

A large proportion of these new fields adopt  objects of study that address the post‑human  convergence of the environmental, technological  and social emergencies. All of them agree that  the new humanities must look for methods and  approaches that are not part of their traditional  toolbox. They have become interdisciplinary and  even transdisciplinary or post-disciplinary, thereby  expanding the old distinction between the “two  cultures”9 of the humanities and the natural sciences  to the “three cultures”,10 which include the social  sciences. They function by transversal team work  across these fields.

Most of the new humanities intersect easily with  the corporate sector, but also with the arts, media,  popular culture and music. This is especially true  of the digital humanities and all AI-driven sectors,  which tend to partake of the consensus about the  advantages of enhancement of both human and  non-human entities. Some of the new humanities  intersect with the tradition of critical thinking which  includes feminist, environmentalist, decolonial  and Indigenous studies areas. They combine  the critical assessment of humanism — and the  European scientific tradition based upon it — with  a critical analysis of anthropocentrism or human  exceptionalism in relation to other species. And they  prove capable of responding to the post‑human  challenges by producing significant innovative  perspectives.11

This takes us to the next question: what institutional  forms can the new post-humanities take? What  social, economic, legal, scientific and academic values  should they embrace? What kind of infrastructures —  digital, financial, environmental, social and political —  can build new social horizons of hope and trust  today? How can the contemporary humanities help  to redesign them and repurpose them in equitable,  democratic and affirmative ways?

I recommend that the new humanities focus on  how to design and uphold what I call affirmative  ethics. Affirmative ethics involves a practical effort to  develop collectively: trust and care in all techno‑fields;  environmental responsibility; intergenerational  solidarity; collaborative digital democracy and  accountability; social justice; sustainable societies  with global healthcare and education; civil rights   for all, especially the social minorities; and, of course,  freedom of press, of thought, of dissent and of critical  enquiry.
<<<END_PAGE_260>>>

<<<PAGE_261>>>
In order to achieve such urgent aims, the humanities  can train our social imaginaries and help us think  beyond the present. This is especially important  when the present is experienced as negative,  in view of the climate crisis, flagrant injustices,  excessive concentration of wealth and cruel social  hierarchies presently produced by the unregulated  economics of the post‑human convergence. The  masses of dispossessed and left-behind citizens  have not reacted kindly to their exclusion from the  techno-bonanza that is benefiting a few global firms.  Consequently, social anger and disenchantment  have become widespread in liberal democracies.

To make things worse, populist political movements  have built their programmes on exploiting this  disenchantment, promoting cynicism, rage,  ignorance and racism, and often directing them  against the old democratic consensus. Populists,  left and right of the political spectrum, exploit the  generalised dismay and anxiety and exacerbate it  by scapegoating stigmatised social categories such  as immigrants, the LBGTQ+ community, childless  women and intellectuals — in short, the “others”.  Moreover, populists tend to be obscurantist and  anti-science, for example by supporting anti‑vaccine  movements. This happens at a time when scientific  research is booming because of great technological  advances but is also becoming more privatised in  neoliberal economies. Many political movements  today are attacking the institution of the university as  a whole, and the field of the humanities in particular,  giving them a bad press as too left-wing-leaning or  as socially irrelevant. Humanities scholars spend a  disproportionate amount of time defending their  sheer existence.

So, what is to be done? I would begin by challenging  two interlinked discursive tactics. The first is to resist  the separation of the environmental aspects of the  post‑human convergence from the technological,  and the separation of both of these from the social.  We need to challenge this new segregation of  knowledge-production practices. The second is  to dispel the aura of historical ineluctability that  surrounds the new technologies, which spreads the  message that everything is already played out.

It is important to stress instead that both practices  and narratives about our post‑human futures remain  open-ended. A process of transition as intricate as  the transformation of the human by the intersection  of complex structural factors — technology, the  environment and social polarisations — can only  be approached as work in progress. As yet, there  can be no foregone conclusion about the kind  of post‑human subjects we are in the process of  becoming. The post‑human convergence is rather a  working hypothesis that requires public discussions  and open dialogues, a plurality of perspectives  and constant vigilance about the new power  relations engendered by the scale and speed of  contemporary technological, environmental and  social transformations.

257
<<<END_PAGE_261>>>

<<<PAGE_262>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

258 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

The key question for researchers in the new  humanities is ethical and political: what are we  asking of our fellow citizens? Do we push them to  think like philosophers, engineers, utopian writers  and artists? How can we prevent them from falling  out of love with democracy and its rules and  protocols? Further, how can we defeat the fatal  attraction of pseudoscience and fake news? And the  persistent, divisive impact of AI-driven falsehoods and  manipulations? We all must meet the challenge of  complexity and of speculative conceptual thinking —  at a time when simplifications and massive lies seem  to rule.

In other words, there is an urgent need to invent  a new nexus between research, society, media  and politics. How can we democratise the current  scientific debates, considering their complexity and  density? How can we help our fellow-citizens to take  part in these debates in an accountable manner?   If the issue at stake is how to redesign the framework  for an enhanced humanity and an augmented  planet, how can we break the news to our fellow  citizens in an affirmative manner? How can we deal  with the reactions of dismay, anxiety and fear these  changes inevitably entail?

Nothing in the course of the events we are going  through is inevitable or outside the grasp of historical  agency. There is not even a consensus about the  profile of the new technologies. I am with those  who think that contemporary Big Tech — including  Google and OpenAI — have enacted a rather narrow  implementation of the potential of these new  technologies. They made them functional to a rather  old-fashioned principle: the automation of labour.  The difference is that nowadays AI is automating  also cognitive and cerebral labour, but the idea is the  same; the generative and speculative potential of  these technologies remains neglected.

The new humanities can help here, reconnecting  us to the pure virtuality of the technologies: to their  speculative experimental core, their capacity to  become anything, not just work machines bent on  profit. To reconnect technologies to their profound  gratuitousness is a creative gesture that turns them  into open portals to new visions and alternative  social imaginaries. Redesigning the social imaginary  is what the humanities do best, mostly through  collaborative experimentations with alternative  usages and functions of the imagination, resting on  an ancient cultural and literary tradition. We need  blueprints and visionary plans for the enhancement  technologies that have been developed to increase  environmental care and generative practices towards  a new political economy for technological societies.  The political scenario must also be enriched, now  that capitalism and democracy have loosened  their historical bonds. Can we imagine a digital  social democracy for the 21st century, based on  collaboration and solidarity between enhanced  entities of the human and non-human type?
<<<END_PAGE_262>>>

<<<PAGE_263>>>
I propose that we construct affirmative ethics as a  social project. We need to revive the critical function  of thinking adequately about our conditions as a  communal practice, making thinking cool again  and rehabilitating the role of the understanding as a  collective ethical practice. Such a practice is backed  by lifelong retraining and education programmes  for all, in a spirit of social solidarity that embraces the  widespread sense of dismay rightly felt by citizens.

The answer is in the doing, in the praxis of  composing alliances and collaborative connections,  and in engaging in broad discussions about the  transformations that we are part of: we who care  enough for our shared futures and who want to  rethink ourselves democratically — together.

259
<<<END_PAGE_263>>>

<<<PAGE_264>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

260 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

INVITED CONTRIBUTION:

The challenges of urban  neurotechnology

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-IC-4-3

Simon Marvin

Professor of Geography, Urban Institute,  University of Sheffield, UK
<<<END_PAGE_264>>>

<<<PAGE_265>>>
Urban neurotechnology refers to the integration   of brain-sensing tools into everyday urban settings,  where mental states are monitored, interpreted  and optimised as resources for shaping behaviour,  performance and well‑being. Cities have rapidly  become test beds for these systems, shifting  neurotech from controlled clinics to the messiness  of workplaces, classrooms and transit systems.  Devices such as brain-computer interfaces  (BCIs) and neural sensors create an ecosystem  that senses and responds at the cognitive level.  This urbanisation of neurotechnology marks a  profound yet still under-explored sociotechnical  transformation.

Shanghai, for instance, is increasingly weaving  neurotechnology into its smart-city strategy,  embedding brain-inspired systems alongside its  cutting-edge urban infrastructure. In Yangpu District,  the city is developing a 200-metre “Brain‑Inspired  Avenue”, featuring live-testing environments  for start‑ups to pilot wearable neurotech within  urban life.1 This initiative complements Shanghai’s  investment in brain‑computing research through the  Shanghai Center for Brain Science and Brain‑Inspired  Technology, which coordinates universities, hospitals  and start‑ups to integrate BCI applications in  public health, mobility and digital governance.2 This  positions Shanghai as a test-bed for neuro-enabled  public services and interactive urban infrastructure in   real-world settings.

Houston, meanwhile, is positioning itself as a  strategic centre of “brain capital”, where cognitive  health, neurotechnology and economic planning  converge. Houston is leveraging its biomedical  ecosystem to explore neurotech applications that  span early brain development to ageing within public  health and education strategies.3 Supported by the  OECD-led Neuroscience-Inspired Policy Initiative and  the related Brain Capital Alliance, the city is piloting  policy frameworks that treat cognitive capacity  as a form of soft infrastructure, reflecting a vision  where post-COVID recovery, national resilience and  economic competitiveness are tied to urban brain  health.4

Such urban neurotechnology represents a  transformation in how we imagine, govern and  experience urban life. Cities are becoming cognitive  frontiers, where cognition itself becomes legible,  governable and marketable.5 There are urgent  questions about privacy and mental autonomy.   Who is collecting neural data and for what purpose?  How much control do individuals have over their  cognitive information when surrounded by brain  sensors? Furthermore, the new landscape raises  concerns about deepening social inequalities, as  some individuals benefit from these advances while  others get left behind, surveilled or manipulated.

In other words, the innovations in progress raise  critical governance and ethical dilemmas. The  diffusion of neurotechnologies into the urban fabric  challenges traditional boundaries between the body,  technology and governance. It is not just a matter of  new technologies but of new relationships between  cognition, infrastructure and authority. This raises  profound questions about consent, autonomy, the  political economy of mental data and the future of  cognitively enabled urban life.

Researchers and policy‑makers need to ask critical  questions about surveillance, optimisation and  the potential for cognitive modulation in urban  environments. Anticipating the future of urban  neurotechnology requires more than merely tracking  technical trends. It needs a systemic research  agenda that recognises the city as a space where  neurotechnological systems are being implemented  and also actively co-shaped by politics, infrastructure  and culture.

261
<<<END_PAGE_265>>>

<<<PAGE_266>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF SCIENCE SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

262 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Long-term research can explore how cities can  act as test beds and also as sites of anticipatory  governance, where public institutions, civil society  and communities co-develop frameworks for  ethical use, inclusive innovation and cognitive  justice. This includes scenario-building that explores  equity, autonomy and unintended consequences,  participatory design for neuro-urban experimental  applications and collective systems, and public  deliberation about acceptable cognitive interventions  in everyday life. Without these foresight processes,  there is a risk of technological overreach and a loss   of democratic control over the neural dimensions   of urban life.

Crucially, urban neurotechnology is not unfolding  uniformly. Authoritarian, corporate-led and  public‑interest approaches differ markedly in  how cognitive systems are introduced, governed  and resisted. In China, city brain experiments in  Shanghai and Beijing function as governance  experiments, combining predictive surveillance,  algorithmic control and marketplaces.6 In the  US, venture capital drives wearable neurotech for  cognitive productivity and consumer feedback.7  In Europe, ethical frameworks emphasise privacy  and mental sovereignty.8 In Africa, researchers are  proactively addressing ethical risks before urban  neurotech becomes widespread and are calling for  co-produced, human-first neurotech innovation in  cities.9 Future research must map these diverging  sociotechnical imaginaries, institutional cultures  and geopolitical strategies, recognising that global  trajectories are shaped not only by innovation but  by governance traditions, social movements and  historical legacies. An international comparative lens  is essential to avoid reproducing Western-centric or  corporate-dominated futures.

GESDA’s anticipatory model highlights the  importance of coupling science foresight with  diplomatic, ethical and social engagement.   Urban neurotechnology is a clear candidate for   such co‑governance and can be implemented   with an international comparative lens.

A key impediment to this is that public  understanding of these tools remains limited,   and few cities have established participatory  pathways for evaluating the deployment of  neurotech. Fortunately, there are critical lessons  for the emerging field of urban neurotechnology  in the way that some European cities, including  Amsterdam, Barcelona and Helsinki, have pioneered  bottom-up approaches to digital sovereignty  by developing suitable governance models.  Furthermore, non-profit organisations such as the  Dana Foundation are also beginning to play a role   in shaping public understanding and ethical  foresight around neurotechnology, particularly  with an emphasis on equity, mental health and  underserved communities.10 Three key insights   stand out:

First, societal control over cognitive data. This  emphasises the need for urban neurotechnology to  be embedded within frameworks that treat brain  data as a civic resource, rather than solely   as a commercial asset.
<<<END_PAGE_266>>>

<<<PAGE_267>>>
Second, transparency and explainability of  neurotechnology. This can be incorporated into  neurotech systems from the outset and is particularly  vital for cognitive-sensing tools used in schools,  transit or workplaces.

Third, participatory governance of neurotechnology.  This can include citizen assemblies, ethical  councils and co-design practices to ensure that  neurotechnology aligns with public values   and avoids replicating the extractive logics   of smart‑city platforms.

Without critical research and anticipatory foresight  on neurotechnology, there is a risk that cities could  develop into environments optimised for commercial  cognitive control rather than for collective human  thriving. However, with care, imagination and  collective deliberation, they might be directed  toward more democratic, inclusive and emancipatory  futures.

263
<<<END_PAGE_267>>>

<<<PAGE_268>>>
PULSE OF DIPLOMACY SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY PULSE OF DIPLOMACY SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

264 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS

Rethinking intellectual property  rights in the age of rapid   scientific progress

4.2	 Economics

As technology accelerates scientific advancements  and patent creation, the tension between  the human right to benefit from science and  technology, and the right of creators to protect  their work, is intensifying.

How can we design future protection models that  balance innovation, access and fairness in a rapidly  evolving technological landscape?

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-PD-4-1

PARTICIPANTS

Moderated by:

With:

Jennifer Schenker

Founder and Editor-in-Chief of The Innovator,   a global subscription-based publication about   digital transformation and sustainability.

Christine Allan de Lavenne

Intellectual Property Attorney and Human Rights  and Innovation Expert at SIDE Law Office.

James Donovan

Head of Science Policy at OpenAI.

Ken Natsume

Assistant Director General at the World Intellectual  Property Organization.

Anthony Taubman

Former Director of the IP Division at the World   Trade Organization.

TAKEAWAY MESSAGES:

“It is not clear who is the author  of what an AI produces, legally  speaking.”

“We always have to balance  the protection of a creator’s  IP — their incentive to create —  with ensuring that people  at large benefit from the  technology they invent.”

“We should diversify IP  systems to match the diversity  of funding that we need for  scientific progress.”
<<<END_PAGE_268>>>

<<<PAGE_269>>>
CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS

Democratising science literacy:  high-level political segment

Bridging the chasm between scientific  advancement and public comprehension   is paramount for navigating the complexities   of our rapidly evolving world.

But can we truly democratise science literacy   in an era of increasing complexity, ensuring that   all citizens are empowered to engage meaningfully  with the scientific and technological forces shaping  their future?

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-PD-4-2

PARTICIPANTS

Moderated by:

Opening remarks:

With:

Alexandre Fasel

State Secretary at the Federal Department   of Foreign Affairs, Switzerland.

Ignazio Cassis

Federal Councillor and Minister of Foreign Affairs  at the Federal Department of Foreign Affairs,  Switzerland

Baiba Braže

Minister of Foreign Affairs at the Ministry of Foreign  Affairs of the Republic of Latvia.

P. Kumaran

Special Secretary at the Ministry of External Affairs,  India.

Adriana Mira

Vice Minister at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,   El Salvador.

Omran Sharaf

Assistant Foreign Minister of Advanced Science   and Technology at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,  United Arab Emirates.

Andrzej Szeptycki

Under-Secretary of State at the Ministry   of Science and Higher Education, Poland.

TAKEAWAY MESSAGES:

“Politicians, private enterprises,  scientists, civil society,  communities and individual  citizens live in separate bubbles.  We must facilitate trustworthy  communication and  collaboration between them.”

“Science and technology must  bring practical benefits to the  lives of ordinary people.”

“Governments must prioritise  their country’s science and  technology sector.”

265
<<<END_PAGE_269>>>

<<<PAGE_270>>>
PULSE OF DIPLOMACY SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

PULSE OF DIPLOMACY SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

266 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS

GESDA Anticipation  Gateway

For emerging science to be used for the benefit  of humanity, new approaches to democratise  the access to this knowledge about the most  consequential emerging scientific developments  and their implications for people, society and the  planet need to be developed: for the public in  general and for current political decision‑makers  as well as for futures leaders across society.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-PD-4-3

PARTICIPANTS

Moderated by:

For the Global Curriculum for Anticipatory Leadership:

Remarks:

With:

Alexandre Fasel

State Secretary at the Federal Department   of Foreign Affairs, Switzerland.

Sandro Giuliani

Senior Advisor, GESDA.

Enrico Letta

Member of the Board of Directors   of the GESDA Foundation.

Rebeca Grynspan

Secretary-General of UN Trade   and Development (UNCTAD).

William Egbe

Managing Partner of Vibranium Capital Group,  Washington DC and Johannesburg, South Africa.

Camelia Ilie

Dean of Strategy and International Affairs   at INCAE Business School, Costa Rica.

Yusuf Leblebici

President of Sabancı University, Istanbul, Türkiye.

For the Geneva Public Portal to Anticipation:

Remarks:

With:

For the Anticipation Observatory:

Henrietta Fore

Member of the Board of Directors   of the GESDA Foundation.

Alexandre Edelmann

Ambassador and Head of Presence Switzerland  at the Federal Department of Foreign Affairs,  Switzerland.

Sarah Kenderdine

Head of the Laboratory for Experimental Museology  at EPFL, the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology   in Lausanne.

Fernando Espinosa Olivera

Deputy Permanent Representative of the Mexican  Permanent Mission to the UN Office in Geneva.

Matthias Troyer

Technical Fellow and Corporate Vice President   of Quantum at Microsoft.
<<<END_PAGE_270>>>

<<<PAGE_271>>>
TAKEAWAY MESSAGES: TAKEAWAY MESSAGES:

“The Anticipation Gateway  comprises three interconnected  projects to democratise the  understanding of emerging  science and its uses.”

“The Global Curriculum for  Anticipatory Leadership  covers science, diplomacy and  policy, business, economics,  global societal trends, science  anticipation, science diplomacy  and leadership skills, and has  educational institutions across  the world as partners.”

“The Geneva Public Portal to  Anticipation is an interactive  installation that will allow  citizens from diverse  backgrounds to anticipate and  co-create images and stories of  the world to come.”

“The Anticipation Observatory  will give decision-makers — be  they diplomats, entrepreneurs  or artists — information and  analysis about current and  anticipated developments in  science and technology.”

267
<<<END_PAGE_271>>>

<<<PAGE_272>>>
PULSE OF IMPACT SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

PULSE OF IMPACT SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

268

Media-innovation analysis

The most striking topics within Science   & Diplomacy in terms of patent growth  are Futures Research and Language and  Communication. However, both of these topics  are dwarfed in the media by discourse around  Science-based Diplomacy (which has grown  significantly this year), Digital Security   and Economics.

LEGEND:

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/4-impact

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

YoY PATENT GROWTH  YoY growth of topic mentions  from May 2023-April 2024 to  May 2024-April 2025

YoY MEDIA GROWTH  YoY growth of granted topic  patents from May 2023-April  2024 to May 2024-April 2025.

LOW HIGH

4.3 Futures Research

4.6 Language and Communication

YoY PATENT GROWTH2

4.5 Behavioural  Science of Groups

LOW YoY MEDIA GROWTH1

MEDIA-INNOVATION MATRIX

4.2 Economics

4.4 Digital Security

4.1 Science-based Diplomacy

HIGH
<<<END_PAGE_272>>>

<<<PAGE_273>>>
CUMULATIVE INVESTMENT IN DIGITAL-SECURITY COMPANIES

400000

CUMULATIVE INVESTMENT (MILLIONS USD)

350000

300000

250000

200000

150000

100000

50000

0

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

NUMBER OF NEW INVESTMENTS IN DIGITAL-SECURITY COMPANIES

NUMBER OF INVESTMENTS

1750

1250

750

250

0

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

NUMBER OF NEWLY FOUNDED DIGITAL SECURITY COMPANIES

NUMBER OF NEWLY FOUNDED COMPANIES

1000 800 600

400

200

0

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

IMPACT FOCUS:

4.4 Investment and  company creation in  Digital Security

Year-on-year investments in digital security have  grown exponentially since 2000. The total and  yearly value of investments are large compared with  other science- and technology-related investments  surveyed in the Radar, coherent with the established  nature of the field. This can be observed in the large  number of new companies coming into existence  each year since 2000. The large jump in investments  in 2020 may be a result of the increased reliance on  digital infrastructure for remote work during the  pandemic and increasing geopolitical tensions and  resulting cyber‑attacks.

Source, facing page: Deep View analysis from 1 May 2022 to 20  April 2024; (1) YoY media growth = YoY growth of topic mentions  from May 2022/April 2023 to May 2023/April 2024; (2) YoY patent  growth = YoY growth of granted topic patents from May 2022/ April 2023 to May 2023/April 2024.

Source, this page: Pitchbook  *Data on newly founded companies in 2023 is incomplete and  will be updated once first funding is raised. Projections indicate  similar levels of company creation to 2021.

269
<<<END_PAGE_273>>>

<<<PAGE_274>>>
PULSE OF SOCIETY SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

PULSE OF SOCIETY SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

270

What do people say?  An analysis of mainstream media articles,  blog posts and scientific articles over a period  of 12 months shows that the global sentiment  on Science & Diplomacy remains divided,  with media from regions such as Asia, Europe  and Africa indicating growing optimism,  while cybersecurity threats and geopolitical  tensions fuel a sentiment of caution in  the Americas and Oceania. The discourse  on Science-based Diplomacy has grown  significantly, but Digital Security remains the  predominant topic overall in this area.

MAINSTREAM MEDIA SENTIMENT

Positive          Neutral          Negative

MAINSTREAM MEDIA 1 May 2024 - 30 April 2025

UNIQUE ARTICLES

VISUALISED ARTICLES

NET SENTIMENT

ARTICLE UNIQUENESS

1 May 2024 - 30 April 2025 SOCIAL MEDIA

NUMBER OF POSTS

VISUALISED POSTS

NET SENTIMENT

UNIQUE IMPRESSIONS

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

76% 15%

975k 5.9k 79% 57%

3,517k 9.1k 41% 121b

China DeepSeek

China DeepSeek

reshapes AI

reshapes AI

Nvidia Global

Nvidia Global

Advancements

Advancements

AI & Cybersecurity

AI & Cybersecurity

in Governance

in Governance

Quantum

Quantum

Computing

Computing

Evolving threats in

Evolving threats in

Cyber Security

Cyber Security

Summit South Africa

Summit South Africa

Human Evolution

Human Evolution

Strategic Diplomacy

Strategic Diplomacy

Cybersecurity

Cybersecurity

Breakthrough

Breakthrough

Warnings

Warnings

Sustainable

Sustainable

Economic

Economic

Development

Development

Leadership, Growth

Leadership, Growth

& executive

& executive

Security Officer

Security Officer

Innovation Driving

Innovation Driving

Strategies

Strategies

Qatar

Qatar

Innovation Driving

Innovation Driving

Strategies

Strategies

Breakthrough

Breakthrough

Awards Program

Awards Program
<<<END_PAGE_274>>>

<<<PAGE_275>>>
DEMOGRAPHICS & SENTIMENT PER REGION

North America

56% 30% 14%

+ Digital ID

+ Strategic Foresight

+ Enhance security

GLOBAL SENTIMENT

•	Sentiment around Science & Diplomacy remains mixed, with optimism driven  by advancements in cybersecurity, cloud solutions and health technologies,  particularly where they support international collaboration and digital resilience.

•	However, growing concerns about cyber threats, digital infrastructure  vulnerabilities and geopolitical tensions are fuelling more cautious or negative  discourse, especially in contexts where national security and operational  stability are at stake.

- Dangerous

- Social conflict

- Propaganda attack

Latin America

59% 23% 18% 59% 15% 25%

+ Digital security

+ Online identity

+ Predictive insights

- Social conflict

- Env. Destruction

- Digital privacy

Europe

57% 16% 28%

+ Cyber security

+ Innovation

+ Predict future

Africa

+ Innovation

+ Security

+ Development

- Digital ID

- Cyber threat

- Criminal

- Cyber attack

- Info security

- Digital threats

•	Distribution of discourse varies by region: in the Americas, 88% of posts originate  from the US. In Europe, the UK leads with 50%, followed by Germany (8%). Africa  sees Nigeria dominate at 53%, with Kenya at 18%.

•	In MENA, Turkey leads the conversation with 46%, and in Asia, India with 59%.  Meanwhile, in Oceania, Australia (92%) and New Zealand (7%).

Source: Deep View social media analysis from 1 May 2024 to 30 April 2025. Note: English-language social

media postings; reposts were excluded from the analysis.

MENA

64% 19% 17%

+ Innovator

+ Info security

+ Entrepreneurship

- Cyber security

- Digital privacy

- Vulnerability

Russia & Asia

70% 20% 11%

+ Strategic Foresight

+ Evolving dynamics

+ Proactive adaption

Oceania

44% 15% 41%

+ Encryption

+ Data control

+ Security

- Cyber criminals

- Digital privacy

- Dangerous

- Force Digital ID

- Cyber criminals

- Loss of freedom

271
<<<END_PAGE_275>>>

<<<PAGE_276>>>
PULSE OF SOCIETY SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

PULSE OF SOCIETY SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

272 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Media analysis

KEY TAKEAWAYS    Science-based Diplomacy and Digital Security are  surging in global discussions, but interest in the  Behavioural Science of Groups, Futures Research  and Language and Communication is cooling, aside  from a few niche gains as in Multilingualism.

Public sentiment around Science & Diplomacy is  becoming more polarised and emotionally driven,  with growing scepticism reflecting sharper public  scrutiny and the impact of current socio-political  and technology developments. That being said,  sentiments around Science-based Diplomacy and  Futures Research have strengthened, highlighting  rising public interest in global cooperation,  peacebuilding, forward-thinking methodologies and  scenario planning.

Language and Communication experienced the  steepest sentiment decline, possibly due to ethical  concerns and discomfort around machine-led  communication and multilingual technology.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/4-society

EMERGING  TOPICS SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM

MAINSTREAM MEDIA GROWTH

MAINSTREAM MEDIA DOMINANCE

SOCIAL  MEDIA SENTIMENT

Science & Diplomacy

50%  Science & Diplomacy

UNIQUE ARTICLES

975k

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

53% 32%

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

60% 15%

4.1 Science-based  Diplomacy

20%  Trust and cooperation modelling

16%  Science-based Diplomacy

4%  Predictive peacebuilding

-10%  Computational diplomacy

0%  Negotiation engineering

4

3

2

1

DOMINANCE

1 2 3

24k

4

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

56% 30%

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

71% 12%
<<<END_PAGE_276>>>

<<<PAGE_277>>>
4.4 Digital Security

4.3 Futures Research

4.6 Language and  Communication 4.5 Behavioural Science  of Groups 4.2 Economics

5%  Data-driven models of collective behaviour

29%  Privacy and security

4%  New empirical and experimental methods 6%  Communication beyond language

-29%  Accessibility, engagement and action 0%  Innovative and participatory futures methods

-11%  Theories and concepts for plural futures

-20%  Optimisation of interventions -11%  Predicting the onset of armed conflict

16%  Global economics

-4%  Interactions with wider global trends

7%  Novel encryption technologies 0%  Digital identity

-3%  Language and Communication

-7%  Behavioural Science of Groups

12%  Formal verification

-5%  Inclusive futures knowledge

-12%  Economics of knowledge

4%  Ecological economics

12%  Multilingualism

-4%  Machines and languages

-8%  Behavioural economics

9%  Digital Security

-5%  Future Research

0%  Economics

1

3

4

3 4

4

2 3

1

3

2

4

1

1

2 3

1 2

2

4

DOMINANCE DOMINANCE DOMINANCE DOMINANCE DOMINANCE

3 4

1 2 3

4

4

4

1

1

383k 1

84k

84k

253k

117k 1

3

3

3

2

2

4

2

2

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

37% 53%

46% 40%

57% 28%

42% 33%

63% 29%

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

70% 9%

66% 23%

58% 14%

51% 8%

62% 13%

273
<<<END_PAGE_277>>>

<<<PAGE_278>>>
PLATFORM INTRODUCTION KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS PLATFORM INTRODUCTION KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

PLATFORM INTRODUCTION KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS PLATFORM INTRODUCTION KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 274

SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM

SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM

5

5

Knowledge  Foundations

Knowledge  Foundations

This platform covers areas of foundational  knowledge that underlie each of the four other  frontier issue platforms. These areas of science  provide society with a deeper understanding   of the basic principles of our world that are likely  to underpin many future breakthroughs in more  applied disciplines. They have wide potential  impact across many different domains: whether  in fundamental sciences, engineering sciences,  social sciences or the humanities, they draw  on research from multiple disciplines and have  effects that span numerous human, social and  environmental spheres.

This platform covers areas of foundational  knowledge that underlie each of the other four  frontier-issue platforms. These areas of science  provide society with a deeper understanding   of the basic principles of our world that are likely  to underpin many future breakthroughs in more  applied disciplines. They have wide potential  impact across many different domains: whether  in fundamental sciences, engineering sciences,  social sciences or the humanities, they draw  on research from multiple disciplines and have  effects that span numerous human, social and  environmental spheres.
<<<END_PAGE_278>>>

<<<PAGE_279>>>
DEEP DIVE (pages 276–285)  Planetarised Humanity: a new era for humankind

GESDA PHILOSOPHY LENS (pages 286–295)  Planetarised Humanity: rethinking our human  condition for a shared planetary future

PULSE OF SCIENCE (pages 296–323)

Containing deep insights into anticipated advances  associated with Knowledge Foundations over  the next 5, 10 and 25 years, the GESDA Pulse of  Science provides the expert opinions of leading  researchers in a diverse set of fields that contribute  to foundational knowledge and understanding,  including synthetic biology, mathematics, fungal  biology and archaeology.

PULSE OF DIPLOMACY (pages 324–325)

The GESDA Pulse of Diplomacy captures the latest  discussions between diplomats and scientists at the  2024 Geneva Science and Diplomacy Anticipation  Summit on nourishing science culture and the  underpinnings of discovery.

PULSE OF IMPACT (pages 326–327)

Current investment trends and dynamics of  company creation highlight synthetic biology as  an increasingly important topic. The GESDA Pulse  of Impact provides data detailing private-sector  investment, intellectual-property activity and  company creation in this area since 2000.

PULSE OF SOCIETY (pages 328–331)

Powered by AI, the GESDA Pulse of Society’s network  and dynamic sentiment analysis of both mainstream  and social media reveals macro- and micro-trends in  public opinion around the world on topics relating   to Knowledge Foundations.

275
<<<END_PAGE_279>>>

<<<PAGE_280>>>
DEEP DIVE SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY DEEP DIVE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

276 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

DEEP DIVE:

Planetarised Humanity:   a new era for humankind

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-5-DD-1

Wiebke Denecke

S. C. Fang Professor of Chinese Language and  Culture, and Professor of East Asian Literatures,   at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Herman Cappelen

Chair Professor of Philosophy and Director of  AI & Humanity Lab at the University of Hong Kong

Rachel Sterken

Associate Professor of Philosophy and Associate  Dean in the Faculty of Arts at the University of   Hong Kong

Orit Halpern

Lighthouse Professor and Chair of Digital Cultures   at the Technical University of Dresden, Germany

Michael O. Hengartner

President of the ETH Board
<<<END_PAGE_280>>>

<<<PAGE_281>>>
Humanity has reached a critical juncture.  Our societies are globally interconnected,  technologically integrated and environmentally  challenged, and our world is characterised  by complex networks that integrate human  and non‑human entities. This is leading to  socioeconomic and technological co-evolution  at an unprecedentedly rapid pace and an  unprecedently large scale.

This co-evolution includes a fundamental reshaping  of human identity and the nature of social  relationships. For example, humans and artificial  agents are beginning to collaborate and co-evolve  in hybrid social networks, leading to the emergence  of new forms of kinship. Emotional connections  with non-human agents have the potential to  significantly affect human-to-human interactions  via technology-mediated experiences, including the  potential for deeper understanding and empathy.  The relationship of individuals with each other and  with society, technology and the planet is changing,  perhaps faster than at any other time in history.

The new concept of “Planetarised Humanity”  expresses the complexity that emerges from the  converging forces of technological disruption,  environmental crises and socio‑economic  inequalities. It aims to capture changes in the  human relational condition that are induced by  accelerating socio‑economic and technological  co-evolution. The implications of Planetarised  Humanity are transformative as well as normative,  reshaping identity, governance and our species’s role  on Earth. As we harness unprecedented innovative  power, the central challenge remains: how do  we conscientiously balance rapid technological  advancement with the enduring imperatives of care,  equity and planetary stewardship for a flourishing,  shared future?

One challenge is that humanity is confronted with  the simultaneous presence of positive and negative  potentials: for example, the positive aspects of  advanced technologies are co‑terminous with  the potential for extinction from environmental  collapse. That forces a form of deep uncertainty and  disagreement, which traditional knowledge and  decision-making structures are not well‑equipped  to resolve. This demands the formation of  new approaches, concepts, frameworks and  methodologies that challenge conventional  boundaries.

For instance, a contemporary view of the world  is that it is actively being remade through  technologies that promise continuous creation  and self-organisation. The algorithmic allocation  of labour (“gig working”) illustrates this  transformation, allowing for the emergence of  dynamic organisations that bear comparatively little  resemblance to previous industrial corporations,  posing consequent challenges for business models,  economic justice, stakeholder relations and  regulation. One response has been to treat these  considerations as the subjects of ad hoc experiment  rather than premeditated design.

More broadly, we can speak of “generative  planetarity”,1 under which the planet and its  biosphere are increasingly viewed and used  as a medium for technological and social  experimentation and design. Generativity itself —  the capacity to produce or create — becomes a  lens through which we understand and interact  with our environment. Currently this perspective is  being promoted by large corporate and state actors  whose goals are unstated, unclear or unaligned  with those of broader society. These entities often  use narratives that emphasise evolution and  intelligence to describe their activities as progressive,  while obfuscating their underlying complexities,  power dynamics and ethical implications, and  thus masking their potential shortcomings. Other  perspectives, while potentially also flawed in their  own characteristic ways, are urgently required to  provide challenge and balance, enabling responsible  stewardship of our shared planetary futures.

277
<<<END_PAGE_281>>>

<<<PAGE_282>>>
DEEP DIVE SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY DEEP DIVE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

278 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Against this backdrop, GESDA gathered  philosophers, social scientists and humanities  researchers to explore these issues during   a three-day workshop in Villars, Switzerland.   In its mission to anticipate the implications of  potential scientific and technological advancements  on global affairs, and to develop inclusive and global  solutions for a sustainable future, three fundamental  questions drive GESDA’s approach:

Who are we, as humans?

How can we all live together as societies?

How can we ensure the sustainable   future of our planet?

Planetarised Humanity has emerged as a  diagnostic concept capturing technology-induced  transformations in our human relational condition:  relation to ourselves, others and the planet. In this  brief, it serves as a heuristic and hermeneutical  tool to explore potential research breakthroughs  in the social sciences and humanities about this  evolving multidimensional relationality and the  corresponding social, economic, and ecological  implications that will shape our collective future.   This meeting report follows the structure of the  Villars workshop, focused on three themes:

The Phenomena session examined major shifts in  identity, community and consciousness triggered by  the way that technology is reshaping self‑perception,  fostering virtual networks, prompting human‑AI  kinships and altering cognition. Coupled with  growing ecological awareness, this session  explored these transformative dynamics, crucial for  understanding and shaping our planetarised future  and its impact on society.

The Tools session aimed to develop frameworks for  Planetarised Humanity. While the data and tools  needed to observe the transition are improving,  interdisciplinary methods for predictive modelling  and inclusive societal design are lacking. It  explored ways of integrating diverse fields, using  transdisciplinary approaches, design thinking and  conceptual engineering to understand and shape  our interconnected future.

The Openings session explored humanity’s  co‑evolution with changing socioeconomic,  political, technological and environmental systems.  It focused on understanding these dynamics to  devise adaptive governance, ethical AI integration  and robust learning systems. The aim was to identify  interventions and pathways for a flourishing global  human-environment system in the Planetarised  Humanity era.

Phenomena

The Phenomena session aimed to explore the  profound transformations defining Planetarised  Humanity, while examining shifts in identity,  community and consciousness. It illuminated  the deep fusion of technology with planetary  systems, highlighting both immense potential and  significant perils. This “tech-planetary fusion”, a core  phenomenon, spurred calls for developing human- and planetary-centric, care-based alternatives to  purely efficiency-driven paradigms, ensuring that  human well-being and ecological health remain  central to our future.

Participants investigated how AI, digital networks  and environmental interdependence reshape  cognitive processes, self-perception and social  interaction, including kinship with non-human  agents. The session identified emerging   phenomena, with the ultimate goal of  understanding these dynamics and their critical  implications for humanity’s interconnected future.  The discussions revealed a tension between  techno‑optimism and a more critical pessimism  regarding the future, with calls for a “critical  optimism” rooted in realism and care.
<<<END_PAGE_282>>>

<<<PAGE_283>>>
Technological transformation and imaginaries

“Generative planetarity” is the phenomenon under  which Earth is fast becoming a vast laboratory  for technological experimentation — exemplified  by AI‑driven phenomena such as smart cities,  automated and autonomous systems, data  centres and massive GPU farms — with powerful,  often technologically deterministic imaginaries  shaping our collective understanding of the  future. In this vision of the world, often promoted  by large corporations, the planet is portrayed as a  self‑organising, evolving entity, managed through  automated and increasingly autonomous processes.

These dominant narratives often establish “horizons  of possibility”2 that can feel inevitable, potentially  legitimising specific, sometimes authoritarian  projects and making it difficult to conceive of  alternatives. The very language and concepts used,  such as a deterministic construal of evolution in  technological or social contexts, can subtly steer  thinking and limit the scope of imagined futures.  That has created an urgent need for critical  analysis and alternative imaginaries to counter the  potentially extractive and dehumanising aspects  of this trend. This involves questioning existing  visions and creating counter-narratives that employ  the power of poetics and design while embracing  speculation.

For example, ensuring that AI systems operate in  a manner that is aligned with human values and  interests is a significant challenge. This “alignment  problem” presents profound philosophical and  ethical dilemmas that scientific methods and  technical approaches alone cannot resolve. When  designing AI for autonomous vehicles or social  networks, for instance, determining what constitutes  human interest or beneficial outcomes is not a  straightforward scientific or technological question  because human values are diverse, culturally  influenced and often contradictory.

While the technological creators of such systems  have acknowledged this, they have nonetheless  deployed these systems at scale while promising  to remedy problems as they arise, using the  data and knowledge they have amassed and  sequestered through their operations. Over time,  they have positioned themselves as the only entities  capable of addressing the alignment problem.  Whether this has led to optimal outcomes and  put socio‑economic co-evolution on a beneficial  trajectory is questionable.

For this to be addressed, the humanities and social  sciences must increase their engagement with such  questions as: Whose values should we embed in AI  systems operating in a diverse society? How should  we design AI systems to make decisions in morally  ambiguous situations where there is no objectively  correct answer? How do we prevent AI from  pursuing goals in way that generates unintended  but significant negative consequences for human  well-being, societal structures or environmental  sustainability?

AI is only one of several powerful technologies  implicated in Planetarised Humanity: quantum  computing, neurotechnology and synthetic biology,  for example, could also be framed this way.   To address these issues, the humanities and social  sciences must abandon a marginal, purely critical  stance. Instead, they need to integrate deeply  with scientific and technological frontiers, actively  contributing to understanding and shaping these  powerful developments to ensure they align with  human values, positive potentialities, societal  well‑being and responsible planetary stewardship.

279
<<<END_PAGE_283>>>

<<<PAGE_284>>>
DEEP DIVE SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY DEEP DIVE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

280 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Environmental and systemic interconnectedness

Many conventional ways of thinking place humanity  at a central and elevated position in the world,  often partially or completely detached from the  environment. These have proven increasingly  inadequate to deal with the realities of the 21st  century. “Post-human convergence”3, by contrast,  aims to capture the simultaneous breakdown of  traditional human-technology-nature boundaries  amid rapid environmental degradation and rising  socio‑economic inequality, forcing a rethink of  humanism and anthropocentrism.

In contrast to purely reactive or exploitative  responses — such as geoengineering fixes,  market‑based carbon trading or techno-solutionist  approaches that maintain extractive relationships  with nature — alternative visions that emphasise a  more holistic approach are needed. For example,  Indigenous knowledge systems demonstrate  care‑based considerations where decision‑making  integrates impacts on seven generations ahead,  decentring immediate human concerns for  long‑term ecosystem health. From a synchronic  perspective, this resonates with “multi-agent  systems”, in which humans, machines, nature and  social institutions are all seen as interdependent and  equally necessary actors, deserving fundamental  consideration. Rather than viewing nature as a  resource to be managed, this framework recognises  forests, watersheds and soil systems as active  participants in planetary processes, deserving  fundamental consideration in governance  and decision-making. This shifts focus towards  relationality and distributed agency in addressing  systemic interconnectedness.

Social and cultural shifts

Contemporary social and cultural transformations are  revealing limitations in traditional Western humanist  frameworks, particularly their emphasis on singular,  autonomous subjects. These frameworks, developed  within specific historical and cultural contexts,  may not adequately address the complexities of  globalised, technologically mediated societies.  The concept of “nomadic subjectivity”4 offers an  alternative analytical framework for understanding  contemporary forms of selfhood. This theoretical  approach proposes that identity functions as  an assemblage — a complex configuration of  embodied, embedded and interconnected elements  involving both human and non-human entities.  Captured by the phrase “I am rooted, but I flow,”  nomadic subjectivity describes subjects as both  grounded and adaptive, capable of transformation  while maintaining coherence. In essence, this  concept provides a non-unitary and relational vision  of subjectivity that remains constantly open to  multiplicity, resisting reductive categorisations. This  approach enables conceptualisation of a multiple yet  bounded self that moves beyond singular models of  rational subjectivity. Rather than replacing existing  frameworks entirely, this model expands analytical  possibilities for understanding how identities evolve  in increasingly interconnected global contexts.

Economic and power dynamics

Discussions on economic and power dynamics  highlighted the need for new perspectives.   For example, the discipline of evolutionary  economics, distinct from mainstream views fixated  on equilibrium and market success, values dynamic  processes, adaptation and learning. It attempts  to broaden the definition of value beyond mere  economic efficiency to encompass community  well‑being, ecological health and social justice.

Generative planetarity also drives new systems  and forms of territorialisation, such as those  underpinning smart cities or automated resource  management. These forms create economies and  exert influence in ways often invisible or illegible   to direct human perception, concentrating power  and demanding urgent critical scrutiny.
<<<END_PAGE_284>>>

<<<PAGE_285>>>
5-YEAR HORIZON

New forms of hybrid intelligences between  machines and biology will emerge, prompting a  philosophical and ethical grapple to understand  their natures and implications for human identity.

The planet will be increasingly and visibly used  as a medium for “generative” technological and  social experimentation (for example, in smart cities  and resource management), leading to intensified  debates over the narratives framing these changes.

10-YEAR HORIZON

The centralisation of power among tech elites will  become more pronounced, with their preferred  narratives and supporting mythologies becoming  mainstream and strongly influencing global  governance and societal values.

The field of economics, particularly classical  approaches, will undergo a significant  transformation due to the deep integration of  AI, big data and advanced analytics, leading to  profound challenges to existing theories of value and  economic organisation.

Societal adaptation to, or contestation of,  technologically mediated forms of human existence  will be widespread, as the design choices embedded  in earlier interactive technologies (regarding care,  relationality and intelligence) solidify their impact on  daily life and social norms.

25-YEAR HORIZON

The Global South — or Majority World — will become  a more central and recognised hub for pioneering  economic models and innovation research, focusing  on development within planetary limits and  integrating diverse knowledge systems, moving  substantially beyond older “catch-up” paradigms.

The ethical frameworks and concepts of “care”   (or their absence) designed into the foundational  AI and hybrid intelligences of previous decades  will become deeply embedded within societal  infrastructures and have long-lasting consequences  for human-technology relationships, social cohesion  and individual well-being.

281
<<<END_PAGE_285>>>

<<<PAGE_286>>>
DEEP DIVE SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY DEEP DIVE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

282 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Tools

Building on these transformative phenomena,  the Tools session focused on identifying and  developing conceptual and methodological tools  to comprehend and shape humanity’s future in an  increasingly interconnected and technologically  mediated world. The session aimed to explore  the development of frameworks necessary to  understand complex global social systems.  It identified the essential role of conceptual  research and development, including conceptual  engineering, to forge new frameworks and  identify necessary new concepts and potential  narratives for understanding emergent realities.  This is linked to the urgent need to rethink many  foundational concepts. For example, the modern  notion of technology as an autonomous, inherently  progressive force is being increasingly challenged.  Similarly, the notion of intelligence is moving beyond  narrow, human-centric or purely computational  definitions towards broader, embodied and relational  understandings.

Participants addressed the limitations of current  observational approaches in studying global,  interconnected social systems and in fostering  the development of methodologies for predictive  modelling and intentional societal design. While  acknowledging the utility of predictive models for  anticipating socio-cultural shifts, flexible, reversible  and co-designed ethical frameworks are also  critically needed to guide intentional societal design  and its implementation through technological  applications. Key goals included discussing when  breakthroughs in these methodologies might occur  and how they could evolve to address the challenges  and opportunities of an interconnected future,  incorporating insights that ranged from philosophy  to economics via anthropology, sociology, political  theory, digital humanities, futures design and global  comparative literature, among others.

Assessment tools  New technologies, particularly AI, inherently  embody human values and knowledge systems that  become experimental philosophies for humanity.  This presents an opportunity for “philosophical  R&D”, where concepts are developed alongside  technology to navigate these embedded values.  “Futures anthropology”5 could become a useful  tool, using ethnography to research possible futures  and to contest dominant, often flawed, narratives  about technology’s role and impact. However,  robust, evidence-based research will be needed to  understand and anticipate socio-cultural impacts,  and to move beyond current observational methods  towards more integrated frameworks.

Influencing tools  Planetarised Humanity recognises that the forces  influencing socio‑economic and technological  development are not developed and released,  but continually evolving and iterating through  reciprocal adaptation that generates novel emergent  outcomes. That speaks to the need for new  approaches to decision-making around those forces  that recognises the deficiencies of past approaches.  For example, the European Union’s AI Act is severely  limited by treating AI as a finished product rather  than as an evolving entity that will be subject  to upstream design choices. Future guard‑rails  for AI and other technologies must embody the  plasticity, reversibility and self-constraint of machines  themselves.

One additional feature of the new generation   of tools will be the need to operate at a planetary  scale, considering deep interconnectedness and  the co-evolution of human and artificial agents.  This requires governance models that can evolve  with emergent social norms and technological  capabilities, fostering cohesion across diverse  value systems and incorporating participatory  decision‑making across stakeholders. This also  speaks to a need to inform and engage citizens   in new ways.

Citizens must be empowered with critical and  future‑oriented literacies and values to engage with  the implications of technology and think beyond  the future trajectories that are put forward on the  basis of current understanding, which are often  narrow and deterministic. That requires a move  beyond mere competency in any technology to a  more holistic mindset which questions and disrupts  such “trajectorist” logics6. This will be crucial to  avoid, for example, the “moral laundering” by which  problematic technologies are first presented as  inevitable and then legitimised as acceptable, rather  than questioning their premises.
<<<END_PAGE_286>>>

<<<PAGE_287>>>
Mitigation strategies  Given the profound socio-economic and  technological co-evolutions occurring at scale,  strategies will be needed to avoid or mitigate  negative potentialities. Moving beyond  techno‑determinism and moral laundering  will require a new form of concrete ethics that  interrogates technology’s rationale and direction,  not just its application. For example, an “ethics  of care”7 could be a grounding principle and  particularly relevant in increasingly decentralised  and technologically mediated systems. This involves  reclaiming pluralism in AI development, building  interpretative space into design and shifting from  optimisation to participatory deliberation. But all of  these require new ways of thinking about the nature  of such systems.

To that end, the “4E cognition” framework, involving  embodied, embedded, extended and enacted  metrics, offers a more expansive view of intelligence.  It moves beyond reductionist or computationalist  approaches and highlights the idea that intelligence  is what we do together. A key tool within this  perspective is “conceptual engineering”, the process  of designing new concepts or modifying existing  ones for specific pre-established purposes when  current conceptual frameworks prove inadequate  for understanding or addressing new realities,  particularly those anticipated in the future. This  process could help to create new conceptual tools to  grasp and navigate the profound shifts brought by  AI and planetary interconnectedness. Planetarised  Humanity is one such tool, a term which GESDA  coined to capture our transforming human relational  condition (to ourselves, others and the planet)  amidst accelerating socio-technological co-evolution  with a view to establishing a highly interdisciplinary  research field with strong actionability potential.

Crucially, these mitigation efforts require robust,  trans-sectoral collaborations. Academia, industry,  policy‑makers and citizens will need to collectively  shape AI’s trajectory, ensuring it is socially desirable  and democratically legitimate rather than driven   by technological possibility or profit.

5-YEAR HORIZON

Quantum AI dramatically transforms machine  intelligence capabilities, requiring new paradigms  for computation

AI companions lead to changes in the way  language is used and developed, requiring new  conceptual frameworks for how meaning is made  and evolves

10-YEAR HORIZON

AI becomes more capable than humans in  significant domains, requiring new approaches   to human control over key technologies.

The collection of vast amounts of personal   data (for example, everything heard or seen  by self-driving cars) requires new concepts for  knowledge synthesis and narrative development.

25-YEAR HORIZON

The speed of automation significantly outpaces  the creation of new jobs, potentially leading to   a large, non-critical work sector.

A new vocabulary for being human emerges  based on new socio‑technological perspectives.

283
<<<END_PAGE_287>>>

<<<PAGE_288>>>
DEEP DIVE SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY DEEP DIVE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

284 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

Openings

The Openings session focused on renewing  social sciences and humanities research through  what participants termed “utopian processes”8 —  methodologies that harness collective imagination  to develop alternative narratives which challenge  prevailing future scenarios. This approach centres  on transdisciplinary, action-oriented frameworks  for engaging with contemporary transformations.  Participants explored intellectual boundaries by  connecting science anticipation with imaginative  practices to examine how positive futures might  be constructed and pursued through potential  developments in their own research fields.

The session identified key research opportunities  and discussed theoretical and practical challenges.  It considered transformative actions, including  challenging existing paradigms and sharing  concrete experiments for creating positive change.  Several actionable proposals emerged, including  a “transgressive science”9 that questions research  norms to foster unorthodox scientific collaborations  and interventions, or “science at large”,10 where  research increasingly occurs outside traditional  institutions. Another is a “Research University 2.0”11  that focuses on creating new knowledge paradigms  through transformational micro-incubators for the  social sciences and humanities.

Such institutions will foster environments in which  humans can speculate about alternative futures  and devise novel ways to realise them. Other calls  included creating new mechanisms to connect  institutions and foster interdisciplinary dialogue   and action, and for GESDA to act as a catalyst   for these efforts.

Conceptual renewal  Our future understanding of human-planetary  relations requires a profound need for conceptual  renewal. One example is the enduring influence  of Judeo-Christian theological conceptions that  position humanity as fundamentally separate from  animals. By contrast, the concept of symbiosis   (in Japanese, 共生 or kyōsei) meaning   “co-becoming” offers a transformative lens that  emphasises the importance of “becoming” together  rather than “being”. This shifts focus from static  beings to dynamic, interconnected processes  of pattern‑reproduction in which a system —  particularly a living system — maintains its form   and structure over time.

A related concept is that of “incapability”, in which  agency is not individual but resides in multi- agent systems. Symbiosis describes the nature  of the interconnected system, while incapability  describes the status of any individual agent within  that system. A simple example is riding a bicycle.  The rider propels the machine, but could not do  so without the involvement of numerous human  and non‑human agents: the mechanical parts of  the bicycle and their inventors; the industrial and  economic agents that assemble and distribute  bicycles; those who develop and administer traffic  laws, signs and infrastructure; and the cooperation   of other road users. The rider, too, is a biological  entity that depends on other biological entities in  order to be able to propel the bike, from gut bacteria  to oxygenating plants. Together, these form a  collective “we” as the true doer.

This multi-agent system then becomes the   subject of action and responsibility, and suggests   a fundamental equality among all necessary agents.  That raises the issue of rights for all these entities,  opening new ethical and systemic models for an  interdependent planetarised existence.

The role of the social sciences and humanities  The workshop envisioned a strategic repositioning  of the social sciences and humanities that builds on  empirically-grounded connections between cultural  practices, neuroscience, and measurable well- being outcomes. This includes reframing purported  objective historical inquiry12 to examine how cultural  memory and heritage practices have functioned  as social technologies for conflict resolution and  identity formation across diverse societies. These  disciplines should inform diplomatic innovations  that transcend the limitations of Westphalian  state-centric models by developing comparative  frameworks for understanding how different  cultural traditions approach collective problem- solving and cooperation. Rather than pursuing  utopian blueprints, this approach treats aspirational  thinking as a methodological tool for expanding  the perceived range of viable policy alternatives  and fostering evidence-based optimism about  institutional transformation.
<<<END_PAGE_288>>>

<<<PAGE_289>>>
Science and design  Transformative shifts in science and design are  having profound implications for processes captured  by the phrase “science at large” — the increasingly  distributed, transnational and socially activated  practice of scientific research that operates across  fluid networks of diverse actors, from crowdfunded  start‑ups to grassroots collectives. This creates new  forms of knowledge production that challenge  conventional institutional boundaries and require  novel governance approaches based on commoning  and solidarity rather than territorial control, raising  questions about risk and benefit distribution.   It also coincides with a shift towards embracing  biological solutions for planetary challenges where  traditional approaches have proven inadequate.   For example, gene therapies could challenge   existing pharmaceutical and regulatory  interventions. This links to the idea of science   at large via new, unconventional frameworks  through which these biological solutions could   be developed and pursued.

Parallel to these shifts in scientific practice,  addressing these challenges requires not only  new governance frameworks but also distributed  approaches to future-making. A “poetics of futures”13  views design as a future-making, directed practice  essential for addressing crises. Its goal is to foster  sustainable innovation through collaborative,  awareness-building and literacy-enhancing  practices, moving beyond mere aesthetics to shape   a viable world. This approach extends to  design‑driven entrepreneurship that embeds  human values into technological devices to foster  positive social‑ecological impact.

Earthly focus  “Earthly planetarity”,14 a complementary variation  of planetarised humanity, advocates engaging with  the planet through everyday, grounded experiences  that move beyond abstract, large-scale visions.  This approach calls for reframing scale not as a  predetermined hierarchy but in terms of distance  and embodied orientation, valuing situated, practical  knowledge alongside broader scientific models and  inviting a downward look towards the earth beneath  our feet. As a research opportunity, this means  shifting our understanding of what makes an issue  “large” or “small” away from conventional labels and  toward lived, physical experience.

5-YEAR HORIZON

An increased focus on research conducted outside  conventional boundaries capitalises on the  shift towards accepting biological solutions for  planetary challenges.

10-YEAR HORIZON

A notable growth in design-for-values-driven  entrepreneurship launches ventures focused on  sustainable products and positive social impact.

Society becomes better positioned not just to  adapt to, but to help actively steer, its co-evolution  with technoscience.

25-YEAR HORIZON

The term “transformative science” — scientific  research and practice that aims to challenge  traditional norms and foster unorthodox  collaborations and interventions — gains  widespread traction and adoption, although its  original meaning becomes diluted as companies  and institutions co-opt the language to describe  often mainstream or commercially driven  activities.

The output from Modern Research Universities  2.0 repositions the social sciences and humanities  by demonstrating how ancient wisdom traditions  and cultural practices — from contemplative  techniques to community-based healing —  contain neuroscientifically validated technologies  for human flourishing and well-being.

285
<<<END_PAGE_289>>>

<<<PAGE_290>>>
DEEP DIVE SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

PHILOSOPHY LENS KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

286 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

PHILOSOPHY LENS:

Planetarised Humanity:   rethinking our human condition   for a shared planetary future

Here we present the reflections of Herman Cappelen,  Chair Professor of Philosophy at the University of  Hong Kong; for the full suite of responses, visit the  online Radar Platform via the QRcode below:

go.gesda.global/26-lens-phi

Herman Cappelen

Chair Professor of Philosophy and Director of  AI & Humanity Lab at the University of Hong Kong

Orit Halpern

Lighthouse Professor and Chair of Digital Cultures  at the Technical University of Dresden, Germany

David Ludwig

Associate Professor at Wageningen University  and Research, the Netherlands

Yasuo Deguchi

Professor in the department of philosophy and  Dean of the Graduate School of Letters at Kyoto  University, Japan
<<<END_PAGE_290>>>

<<<PAGE_291>>>
Future science and technology breakthroughs   will radically transform the most basic features  of our experience. These transformations will  challenge our fundamental assumptions about  what it means to be a human and how we can  live together as societies and in a sustainable  relationship with the planet. Anticipating the  corresponding conceptual disruptions is essential  if we are to integrate these advances with human  values and societal needs across disciplines  and sectors. Drawing on GESDA’s “Planetarised  Humanity” as a framework to capture this  accelerating socio-technological co‑evolution,  leading philosophers address our three  fundamental questions: Who are we as humans?  How can we live together as societies? How can   we ensure a sustainable future for the planet?

Who are we as humans?

Herman Cappelen: We are linguistic creatures.  Language shapes how we think and talk. It’s what  enables us to plan and coordinate actions, and  as such it is at the foundation of how we live with  others. Language connects us to concepts, and  when we communicate, we share concepts. Some  concepts are particularly important to us, for example  “person”, “agent”, “rationality”, “morality”, “freedom”,  “consciousness” and “responsibility”. These concepts  are under great stress because we are becoming  increasingly entangled with non-human intelligences,  which are also linguistic creatures of an alien kind.  Their “language” emerges from a high-dimensional  statistical space that is fundamentally opaque to us.  As we integrate these systems into our lives, they  will inevitably begin to shape our own linguistic  environment. They will subtly alter the meanings   of our words and the extensions of our concepts in  ways we do not control and may not even perceive.   If our world is built with words, the most critical human  task is to take ownership of our conceptual toolkit.   Our future will be determined by our skill, or lack  thereof, as conceptual engineers.

287
<<<END_PAGE_291>>>

<<<PAGE_292>>>
DEEP DIVE SCIENCE & DIPLOMACY

PHILOSOPHY LENS KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

288 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

How can we live together as societies?

HC: A central challenge for any society is navigating the  conflicts that arise from competing interests, differing  values and scarce resources. These tensions occur  between individuals, across groups and increasingly,  between humans and the non-human agents. Faced  with such conflict, we have two fundamental options:  force or talk. We can let might make right or we can  use language to deliberate and seek common ground.  The path of talk is the foundation of all civil order. It is  the work of law, politics and diplomacy. But for talk to  function, it requires a shared language. This means  more than a shared vocabulary. It requires that we  assign shared content to our key terms. Without  a common understanding of what constitutes a  promise, an agreement or a right, deliberation is simply  an exercise in talking past one another. This shared  understanding, however, is never permanently fixed.  Language is dynamic.

We are in a constant state of linguistic negotiation  over the boundaries of our concepts. The great risk  is that these negotiations can fail. When they do,  we face communicative breakdown. If we can no  longer agree on the meaning of the words we use to  resolve our disputes, language ceases to be a useful  tool. Deliberation stalls, trust erodes, and the space  for peaceful resolution shrinks. At that point, the  alternative of force becomes increasingly attractive.  This is how civil societies begin to unravel.

Next, we must project this dynamic onto our future  with AI. Disagreements with and about these systems  are inevitable. They will arise from their misuse by  humans in warfare and for social control. They will   stem from direct competition for resources and   the economic disruption of job displacement.   More fundamentally, conflict could emerge from  a basic misalignment between their goals and our  own. We must try to resolve these conflicts and align  these systems with our values, a task that, at its core,  is a form of “talk”. But what happens if our linguistic  negotiations with these alien intelligences break  down? A communicative breakdown with a powerful  autonomous system would be a failure on a different  scale entirely, potentially a catastrophic one. Our ability  to live together will depend on a commitment to the  continuous, difficult work of linguistic negotiation   and conceptual coordination.
<<<END_PAGE_292>>>

<<<PAGE_293>>>
How can we ensure a sustainable   future for the planet?

HC: The problem of sustainability is not, at its root,   a technical one. We treat it as an issue to be solved   by better engineering or smarter economics,   but these approaches only address the symptoms.   Our unsustainable trajectory is the logical output   of the conceptual software our civilisation runs on.   We are not failing by accident: we are diligently  executing a flawed program. This program is built  on defective conceptual tools. One is our concept of  “progress”, defined as limitless growth. Another is our  concept of “nature”, which frames the planet as an  external resource. But the most fundamental flaw  may be in our concept of the human agent itself.  We operate with a model of a discrete, biologically  bounded self, a “natural” human distinct from its tools.  This concept is already crumbling as our minds extend  into our technologies, and it becomes incoherent as AI  is woven into our cognitive architecture. If the problem  is conceptual, the solution must be as well. Securing  a sustainable future requires a planetary project of  conceptual engineering. We must redefine progress   as resilience and well‑being. We must cultivate a  concept of nature that reflects deep interdependence.

Crucially, we must engineer a new, more fluid concept  of the self — one that acknowledges our existence  as cognitively extended beings, inseparable from the  technological and ecological systems we inhabit.   This project is made urgent by AI. If we build AI systems  based on a sharp distinction between “human”  and “machine”, we will create brittle and adversarial  relationships. If we ask an AI to “optimise for the user”  based on a narrow, individualistic concept of the  self, it will do so at the expense of the cognitive and  ecological systems that actually sustain that user.   We cannot align AI to a sustainable future until we  have first aligned our own concepts. Ensuring a  sustainable future is therefore the ultimate test of  our capacity as linguistic creatures. It demands that  we move beyond using our concepts to describe the  world and toward taking active responsibility for their  design. True planetary stewardship is not just the  management of physical resources. It is the conscious,  careful stewardship of our conceptual ecosystem,  starting with the very concept of what it means   to be human.

289
<<<END_PAGE_293>>>

<<<PAGE_294>>>
KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS PULSE OF SCIENCE

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 290

5.1

Synthetic Biology

CHAIR:   Patrick Cai

Professor and Chair of Synthetic Genomics,  University of Manchester, UK; Visiting Professor,  Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  The University of Hong Kong and Chinese  Academy of Sciences

CONTRIBUTORS:   Junbiao Dai, Tom Ellis, Michael Jewett,  Rodrigo Ledesma-Amaro, Julius Lucks,  Vivek Mutalik, Harris Wang

Synthetic biology is a set of emerging technologies  enabling the modification and creation of living  cells and organisms, and of their building blocks.  It promises breakthroughs in fundamental biology  and has possible applications in fields ranging from  nutrition to engineering.1

Synthetic biology operates on multiple scales,  from molecules to multicellular organisms to  whole ecosystems.2 At the smallest scale, we can  manufacture novel molecules and materials that  do not exist in nature. Non-living materials may be  imbued with properties of living organisms, such  as self-repair.3 Alternatively, microorganisms can  be engineered to produce desirable molecules, for  instance by genome synthesis or directed evolution.

At the level of cells, artificial versions of key  biomolecules such as nucleic acids can be  synthesised and introduced into the genomes of  microorganisms.4 Other engineered cells can be  used as biosensors, for instance to detect threats,5  to produce other useful chemicals or to break down  harmful ones such as pollutants. They can also be  induced to form tissues and organs, which could   be used in place of transplants.6

Multicellular organisms can be modified using  genome-synthesis editing. There have also been  preliminary attempts to create wholly artificial  multicellular organisms.7

Given its wide-ranging applications, there is a need  for synthetic biology to be developed alongside  ethical and societal expertise in order to shape how  and why decisions are being made, and for whom.
<<<END_PAGE_294>>>

<<<PAGE_295>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

Synthetic biology enables the creation and  modification of living organisms, and of their  molecular building blocks. The field is advancing  rapidly. In Fundamental synthetic biology, faster  and better genome editing, and other technologies,  are enabling the development of heavily modified  organisms. The potential applications of synthetic  biology are immensely varied. The approach is  already being used in Medicine and health, for  instance to develop genetic therapies for inherited  diseases, to engineer new medicines and to design  new cancer therapies. Likewise, there is considerable  potential to improve Manufacturing, industry  and agriculture. Synthetic biology enables new  technologies such as bioelectronics and the creation  of new materials. Bioplastics created from living  organisms could replace at least some plastics from  fossil fuels. Synthetic pesticides and gene drives  may reduce crop losses and also cut costs. Finally,  there are emerging applications in Energy, climate  and conservation. These include engineering  at-risk organisms to be more resilient against  environmental change and using microorganisms   to produce zero-carbon fuels such as green  hydrogen. Because of the potential risks to humans  and ecosystems, there is an urgent need to develop  security measurements for synthetic biology.

5.1 	 Synthetic Biology

SUB-TOPICS

5.1.1	 Fundamental synthetic biology

5.1.2	 Manufacturing, industry   and agriculture

5.1.3	 Medicine and health

5.1.4	 Energy, climate and conservation

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

The ability to modify and create organisms, living  cells or their building blocks could lead to major  breakthroughs in fundamental biology and unleash  new possibilities in nutrition, pharmaceuticals and  engineering. While breakthroughs in synthetic  biomolecules and tissues are expected in the  next six years, progress in synthetic cells and  multicellular organisms is further away. Future  breakthroughs in Synthetic Biology will be hugely  transformational and therefore the field has a high  overall Anticipation Potential score.

MORE INFORMATION

go.gesda.global/syn-bio

291
<<<END_PAGE_295>>>

<<<PAGE_296>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

292

Synthetic Biology

5.1.1 Fundamental synthetic biology

The aim of synthetic biology is to treat life as programmable matter and   to reprogram it to serve human ends. This requires understanding the intricate  mechanisms underpinning living cells and devising ways to manipulate those  systems. Genome editing, for instance using CRISPR-Cas, is a key tool.8   DNA synthesis has become much faster and cheaper, enabling researchers   to create microorganisms with wholly synthetic genomes from scratch.9   AI will be a major driver for advances in synthetic biology. This has already  been seen with AlphaFold’s ability to convert DNA sequences into predictable  protein structures.

A major challenge is to create generic platforms for synthetic biology.   These will improve the accessibility of the technology, especially in the  developing world, and open the way to more repeatable experiments.  Synthetic biology platforms could include artificial vesicles for catalysis   of reactions and delivery of molecules,10 programmable systems for gluing  proteins,11 and microorganisms with minimal genomes that are more readily  reprogrammed and rationally designed.12 Ecosystems of synthetic organisms  also have potential but are under-explored.13

In order to achieve the desired goals quickly and effectively, there is a need to  develop new methods of designing synthetic organisms. Multiple avenues are  being explored: some focus on designing organisms that exhibit goal-seeking  and problem-solving behaviours,14 while others are aiming for an open-ended  evolutionary process that will continue to develop and change.15

The opportunities of synthetic biology come with risk. Engineered organisms  have considerable potential to harm humans and ecosystems intentionally  or accidentally. Hence some synthetic biologists are devising ways to contain  their engineered organisms:16 for instance, ensuring organisms can only  survive when given a specific chemical that is not found in nature.17 The best  strategies will use multiple orthogonal control systems, providing several  fail‑safes to minimise the chances of escape.18

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Synthesis tools mature

Speedy synthesis of  longer pieces of DNA  spanning hundreds of  kilobases is achieved.  Synthetic RNA/DNA  devices for cell control  begin to make an impact.  AI is able to infer function  from the structure of all  biological molecules,  changing how we design,  alter and annotate  genomes. Computational  tools currently used in  model organisms are  readily adaptable for  non-model organisms.  Cell-free systems further  accelerate design-build- test-learn cycles.

Synthesis costs fall

DNA synthesis becomes  as cheap as DNA  sequencing. Generic,  widely accessible  platforms and chassis  for synthetic biology  appear. Synthetic  biology and biomaterial  design are integrated.  Dependence on plasmids  is reduced, allowing  integration of much  longer DNA sequences  into organisms. Improved  genotype-phenotype  mapping enables more  rational design and  prediction of effects  of interventions, and  AI starts to predict  emerging phenomena.  Proteins for catalysis are  designed. Ethics and  access to the technology  start to shape its  development and use.

AI improves user access   for synthesis

Integration of AI  enables users to supply  instructions in human  language, which are  then implemented in the  molecular construction.  Rational design of  synthetic microbial  ecosystems is achieved.  Researchers develop  fully designed microbial  genomes for specific  tasks. Heavily automated  synthetic-biology labs  function as “cloud labs”  for biological research.  Massive parallel editing of  genomes, with hundreds  of thousands of changes  at a time, becomes  possible. Sustainable  partnership with the  planet allows the design  of entire biological  ecosystems that serve  those who need them  the most.
<<<END_PAGE_296>>>

<<<PAGE_297>>>
Synthetic Biology

5.1.2 Manufacturing, industry and agriculture

The tools and products of synthetic biology have potential applications in  manufacturing and many other industries, including farming. Much of this  work is at an early stage and there are few commercial products as yet.19  Key challenges include scaling up lab-based experiments in a commercially  viable way20 and controlling synthetic organisms and their interaction with  their environment.21

The most obvious potential is in chemistry and materials science, as  microorganisms such as bacteria or yeast can be engineered to synthesise  chemicals22 and materials.23 In effect, living cells are used as factories.24   Thanks to catalytic enzymes, biological systems can often perform syntheses  at lower temperatures and pressures than traditional chemical systems, saving  energy and reducing greenhouse-gas emissions. There is untapped potential  in the engineering of microbial communities and multicellularity, rather than  single cells, for these purposes.25

As well as purely biological systems, synthetic biology may be integrated  with other forms of technology. For instance, there is growing interest in  synthelectronics, which fuses electronics and synthetic biology.26   Living photovoltaic solar cells27 are one possible application.28

An area of increasing interest is the use of synthetic biology to produce food  and food ingredients. Examples of this include the use of microbial cells  to produce specific molecules such as vitamins, the use of plant cells and  biomass to make plant-based meat alternatives, or the use of animal cells   to make cultivated meat.29

Lastly, many actors are attempting to apply synthetic biology to agriculture.  For instance, it may be possible to re-engineer photosynthesis, the process   by which green plants use sunlight to make sugars from carbon dioxide.   More efficient photosynthesis could lead to increased crop yields.30   In the longer term, it may also be possible to engineer the fates of plant   cells, optimising the morphology of the plants for new environments.31

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Engineering   starts to scale

Multiple engineered  cell lines are used to  synthesise chemical  products. Increasingly  systematised methods  are available for  engineering cellular  factories. New bioreactors  specialised for products  like cultured meat are  built, with AI control  systems to maximise  efficiency and scalability,  enable smooth  transitions from lab  scale to industrial scale.  New growth media for  animal cells are achieved,  perhaps derived from  microbes. Transgenic  crops are made resistant  to certain stressors,  based on changes to  corresponding pathways.

Rational design  comes of age

Rational design of  tissues for chemical  and materials synthesis  becomes the norm. More  efficient photosynthesis  is achieved in genome- edited crop plants which  are fertilised sustainably  and monitored using  biosensors. Synthetic  systems, including cell- free systems, start to be  used for manufacturing  many products at scale.  New feedstocks for  manufacturing, including  waste and simple carbon  molecules like carbon  dioxide, are available.  Research improves  culturing of engineered  cells for food production.  Cell-based manufacture  becomes routine. New  approaches for distributed  manufacturing mature.

Synthetic biology is  integrated into other  technologies

Widespread integration  of synthetic biology into  other technologies such  as electronics. Generic,  customisable systems  for culturing engineered  microorganisms for  chemical synthesis  appear. Biological  catalysis outperforms  traditional pure chemistry  approaches on efficiency  or price. Engineered crops  are able to resist multiple  stressors associated with  extreme environments,  based on multiple  genomic changes. New  food flavours not found  in nature are designed,  based on detailed  mapping of flavour  components and their  chemical or genetic  underpinnings.

293
<<<END_PAGE_297>>>

<<<PAGE_298>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

294

Synthetic Biology

5.1.3 Medicine and health

Synthetic biology is already being applied to some areas of medicine, and  there is considerable potential to expand its use.32 Many medicines are either  sourced directly from living organisms or based on chemicals produced  in nature. Synthetic biology has the potential to find many new candidate  drugs33 and to produce medicines in cellular factories.34 Notably, the first  synthetic vaccines have been made and shown to be effective.35

It is theoretically possible to use genome editing to treat genetic diseases.36  Inherited diseases are a particularly tempting target. A number of  technologies exist for precision genome editing of human cells,37 and some  in vivo experiments targeting conditions like mucopolysaccharidosis have  already been conducted.38 However, genome editing’s potential goes beyond  genetic conditions. For instance, CRISPR-Cas may be used to treat viral  infections by targeting the virus’s genome within human cells.39 There is also  potential for improving cancer treatments,40 such as by engineering immune  cells to kill tumours.41 To minimise the risk of off-target effects, improved maps  of human genetic diversity are a prerequisite for such therapies.42

Therapies based on synthetic cells43 have shown promise for certain   hard-to-treat conditions such as spinal muscular atrophy.44 In some cases,45  bacteria can act as “living drugs”.46 Controlling such cells remains a challenge,47  but programmable synthetic receptor systems may offer a means of doing  so.48 There have also been preliminary investigations into the benefits of  modifying the skin microbiome.49 Going beyond cells, engineered tissues have  potential as drug-delivery systems,50 while synthetic transplant organs and  induced tissue regeneration remain distant but tantalising possibilities.51

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Human cells and genomes  are re-engineered through AI

AI guides the  re‑engineering of  human cells and  genomes. The human  pangenome is used  to predict unwanted  side effects of genome  edits. Cell-based  diagnostic systems can  be implanted into the  human body. Rational  design of binding  molecules such as  antibodies leads to new,  targeted treatments.  More effective probiotics  and symbiotics are  available. Many new  cell therapies such as  CAR T-cell and cancer  therapeutics begin to  appear, along with rapid  design and production  of easily programmable  RNA-based vaccines,  including variants for  emerging strains.

Synthetic-cell therapies  are customisable

Generic and customisable  systems can create  synthetic‑cell therapies.  Cellular factories allow  high‑throughput  production of new  therapeutics. Improved  understanding of  microbiome-host  relationships enables  microbiomes to be used  for therapy. Cellular  sensors, some integrated  with electronic systems,  monitor fluctuating body  systems such as blood  sugar. A new base‑editing  tool is discovered  which opens up fresh  therapeutic strategies.  Cell-free biosensors are  used to assess water  quality.52,53

Organ production  is programmable

Programmable organ  production from  stem cells for human  transplants becomes  possible, along with  inducible tissue  regeneration for some  organs. Whole‑organ  engineering begins.  Cellular devices can  both diagnose and treat  conditions, for instance by  synthesising a treatment.  Long‑lasting microbiome  therapeutics that can  release a drug steadily  eliminate the need to  take pills. Engineered  phage therapies for  antibiotic-resistant  bacterial infections  become available.  Synthetic‑biology  approaches to public  health provide clean  water, nutrition and  improved air quality.
<<<END_PAGE_298>>>

<<<PAGE_299>>>
Synthetic Biology

5.1.4 Energy, climate and conservation

There are many theoretical applications of synthetic biology to  environmental problems, including tackling biodiversity loss, pollution   and climate change. Much of this research is at a preliminary stage.

There are multiple avenues for using synthetic biology to mitigate climate  change. Algae and other cellular factories could be used to produce renewable  fuels, offering a less land-intensive alternative to biofuels.54 Notably, some  early work has been done on engineering microbes to produce hydrogen.55  Unlike existing methods of hydrogen manufacture, this would be low- or  zero-carbon.56 Similarly, microbes are being engineered for enhanced carbon  capture, potentially removing carbon dioxide from the air.57

The flow of pollutants into the environment may be reduced through the  use of synthetic biology. For instance, chemical pesticides may be partially  replaced by biotechnologies such as RNA interference for pest control or   by engineering the pests themselves — using gene drives, for example.58  Where pollutants are already present, engineered microbes may speed   up their degradation.59

Endangered species and ecosystems may be made more robust through  synthetic biology.60[56] Genome editing may be used to monitor threatened  species or to identify the species making up harmful algal blooms.61 More  radically, genome editors could enhance adaptive traits, for instance by  making coral holobionts more tolerant of higher temperatures to protect  coral reefs from climate change.62 Any such endeavours would need a reliable  understanding of the ecosystems involved: in particular, it is important to gain  a better understanding of microbial ecosystems, which are also threatened  but are understudied.63

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

AI accelerates discovery

Climate-resilient staple  crops are developed.  Improved catalytic  abilities help achieve  bioremediation of some  organic pollutants, such   as oil. Improved fixation   of carbon and nitrogen  from the air reduces  the need for chemical  fertilisers. AI enables  rapid discovery of new  organisms, pathways and  molecules with important  ecosystem functions.  Carbon-negative  manufacturing provides  proof of principle.

Engineered organisms  achieve climate resilience

Wild species are  engineered for resilience  to climate change  and other stressors,  for example corals and  their holobionts are  engineered for heat  tolerance. Microbes  are engineered for  biodegradation of  multiple plastics and  for upcycling of waste  products. Reliable pest  control is achieved  using RNA interference.  Biological synthesis  of replacements for  animal products like  leather reduce the  environmental impacts  of livestock farming.  Large-scale biosensors  are deployed dynamically  around the world.

Biodiversity begins   to be restored through  engineering

Rational ecosystem  engineering is used for  biodiversity restoration.  Engineered bacteria  are able to achieve  large-scale green  hydrogen production.  Extinct species are  generated, and synthetic  biology is applied  to geoengineering  practices such as solar  radiation management  and to carbon capture.

295
<<<END_PAGE_299>>>

<<<PAGE_300>>>
KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS PULSE OF SCIENCE

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 296

There is also no settled theoretical framework  for studies of the origins of life. A recent proposal  called assembly theory,2 for instance, has not yet  achieved widespread acceptance. Assembly theory  aims to measure the complexity of a molecule by  the number of steps required to make it. However,  life often acts to simplify the molecules it uses,  and furthermore much of the complexity lies not  in the individual molecules but rather in the set  of interactions between them. This means that  researchers must study not only individual chemical  processes but also the environment in which  they happen — and their effects on neighbouring  processes taking place within that environment. CHAIR:   Betül Kaçar

5.2

Science of the   Origins of Life

Assistant Professor, University of Wisconsin-Madison

CONTRIBUTORS:   Moran Frenkel-Pinter, Ryo Mizuuchi,  Erik Persson, Davide Pisani, Sudha Rajamani,  Eric Smith, Jean-Pierre de Vera,  Frances Westall, Lyle Whyte

Living organisms as we know them today are the  extremely complex products of a long period of  evolutionary change. Understanding the origins of  life therefore can teach us a great deal about the  possibilities inherent in biology and potential routes  towards new medical insights, as well as providing  unparalleled perspectives on cosmological history  and our own place in the universe.

Researching the origins of life involves study of  biology, chemistry, geology, palaeontology, physics,  cosmology and information theory, among other  disciplines. Investigations require that researchers  consider conditions on the early Earth and how they  changed, understand fundamental issues in systems  chemistry, and identify the most essential features  of living organisms. As a result, progress in this area  depends partly on improvements to the geological  record, partly on advancements in measurement  techniques necessary to study highly complex  chemical systems and to a great extent on progress  in fundamental biology.

Much progress has been made, but there remain  many areas of debate, such as the chronological  order in which nucleic acids, other polymers,  metabolic reactions, lipid-based compartments   and various other components of living systems  arose.1,12 In order to answer such questions,  researchers attempt to experimentally demonstrate  geologically plausible processes that lead to life-like  behaviours, features and phenomena.
<<<END_PAGE_300>>>

<<<PAGE_301>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

Understanding the origins of life is of both practical  and philosophical interest. Not only does this  subject have the potential to add to physics, biology  and medicine, it may also inform humanity’s  understanding of its place and role in the universe.  Research efforts in this area involve attempts to  understand and create the Prebiotic chemistry that  can give rise to phenomena associated with life, and  to understand the Systems biology of how these  phenomena interact to create the complexities  observed in living systems. These theoretical and  experimental investigations are informed and  supplemented by ongoing research into the history  of life, as revealed in The geological record on  Earth and in the evidence derived from studies  of chemical processes and molecular signatures  observed in off-Earth environments. Studies of  the surface and atmospheres of the solar system’s  planets and moons, and the light received from  planetary environments beyond our solar system,  offer promising routes to understanding Exobiology  and how life might arise in ways that differ from  terrestrial biological pathways.

5.2 	 Science of the Origins of Life

SUB-TOPICS

5.3.1	 Prebiotic chemistry

5.3.2	 Systems biology

5.3.3	 The geological record

5.3.4	Exobiology

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

Understanding the origins of life is an enormously  challenging multidimensional problem, but progress  is being made. Experts predict breakthroughs in  the next five years for Prebiotic chemistry, but  breakthroughs in Exobiology are more than 20 years  away. The Anticipation Potential score of the latter  is also driven by the lack of awareness, the strong  impact of the field and the need for coordinated  international action to capitalise on its advances.

MORE INFORMATION

go.gesda.global/sci-orig

297
<<<END_PAGE_301>>>

<<<PAGE_302>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

298

Science of the Origins of Life

5.2.1 Prebiotic chemistry

Making the chemical building blocks of life in a way that is   “prebiotically plausible” — that is, likely to have occurred naturally   on Earth — is a central pillar of research in this area.3 In the 21st century  there has been considerable success in obtaining multiple biochemicals,  relevant to different aspects of the living organism from the same feedstock  and environment.4 Experiments have demonstrated that a small number   of starter chemicals can lead, with minimal intervention and often with   self-organising, highly robust reaction networks, to hundreds of products.5

Commensurately, researchers are studying how individual chemical   reactions can aggregate to form network-level chemical systems that  demonstrate attributes that we generally associate with life.6,7,8 Machine  learning may prove to be a useful tool for understanding the properties   of these chemical networks.9

There is a growing scientific understanding of how systems of chemicals can  change over time and in particular what it might mean for them to “evolve”  in the absence of true genetic control. Recent findings indicate multiple  characteristics that could be used to define a genuinely “complex” chemical  predecessor to life at the systems level.10,11 These might include: an emergent  set of chemicals or processes that is robust even amid changes to the rest  of the system; systems that are far from chemical and thermodynamic  equilibrium (a non-equilibrium state is one of the central features of life);   or emergent chemical systems that are capable of processing information   (but which do not require explicit structures, such as genes or the ribosome,   to store or process biological genetic information).12

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Automation begins   to pay off

Chemical systems have  been developed that  display open-ended  evolution, that is,  avoiding equilibrium.  Increased use of  automation and AI  allows us to conduct  high-throughput  experiments.

Chemical computation  becomes possible

“Protocells” with   self-replicating nucleic  acid driven by metabolic  reactions are created.  Laboratory experiments  utilising a small array of  reactive compounds have  the topology and kinetics  necessary to carry out  basic computational  processes via chemical  reactions. Network-level  descriptions of both living  and non-living chemical  systems distil a small  number of correlative  factors associated with  the expression of   “life-like attributes”   in those systems.

Predictions of life-like  chemistry become possible

We have systematic  comparisons of the  prebiotic chemical  potential of different  geological settings.  Naturally occurring  reactive compounds  are shown to have the  necessary topology  and kinetics to permit  emergent information- processing systems to  form as predecessors to  living systems. Systems- level descriptions of living  entities are sufficiently  sophisticated to permit  direct predictions of the  frequency of occurrence  of chemical systems with  life-like behaviours, which  can in turn be used to  infer the probability of  life arising spontaneously  under generic prescribed  conditions.
<<<END_PAGE_302>>>

<<<PAGE_303>>>
Science of the Origins of Life

5.2.2 Systems biology

Any investigation of how life originated aims to conceive and create  simplified versions of living systems that are nonetheless self-sustaining.13  This requires the tools of systems biology, where living organisms are  understood as networks of chemicals and of systems. Systems biology treats  life as a complex system of interacting nodes, each with its own properties,  and aims for a holistic and computational level of understanding.14

A key aim is to produce “emergent” properties, where the overall system has  properties and functionalities that are not inherent in the individual parts but  emerge from their interactions.15 One example would be self-organisation —  systems of chemicals that can self-assemble into three-dimensional structures  or reaction cycles, and which are on some level self-sustaining.

This move towards studies of complex systems presents a considerable  analytical challenge. Modern experiments that seek origins for the emergence  of life often involve set-ups in which dozens of chemicals, or even more, interact  with one another. As a result, research is aiming to develop highly sensitive  analytical techniques that can track the changes in these systems.16

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Evidence of primordial  metabolic processes arises

We accumulate  experimental evidence  that metabolic processes  could have sprung  up on the primordial  Earth, in the form of  non-enzymatic versions  of all major metabolic  cycles known to be  evolutionarily ancient.

Extinct biomolecules   are reconstructed

Palaeoenzymology  uses the tools of  synthetic biology  and phylogenetics to  reconstruct “extinct”  biomolecules.

Model of LUCA brings  benefits

A model of the Last  Universal Common  Ancestor (LUCA), based  on synthetic biology,  phylogenetics and  palaeontology, provides  useful understanding   of life’s history.

299
<<<END_PAGE_303>>>

<<<PAGE_304>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

300

Science of the Origins of Life

5.2.3 The geological record

Our knowledge of the early Earth offers a key constraint on hypotheses   for the origin of life. Unfortunately, the overwhelming majority of the oldest  rocks on Earth have been destroyed or altered by geological processes such  as tectonic shift. Consequently, the geological record is extremely poor for  the first billion years of Earth’s 4.5-billion-year history.17 The earliest confirmed  fossil organisms to have yet been discovered are 3.5 billion years old,18 and   so all we know is that life arose during a 1-billion-year window — an enormous  span of time, roughly twice as long as complex animals have existed.

Improvements in our understanding of the geological record will continue  to narrow down when and how life may have formed. This may happen  through discovery of hard evidence of life at an earlier date, through innovative  synthetic biology and evolutionary systems-biology tools that reconstruct  ancient life,19 or through demonstrations that conditions before a certain point  were unremittingly hostile to life.20

There is currently limited geological evidence to illuminate conditions on  the early Earth. New discoveries about the temperature range, the presence  or absence of exposed land, and the chemical make-up of the oceans and  atmosphere, as well as the elemental composition, would all provide useful and  significant information from which research could gain a better understanding  of which scenarios of the origin of life are plausible.21,22,23 These questions are  bound up with fundamental problems in geology, notably the origin   of modern plate tectonics.24

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Criteria for assessment  of evidence for life  are developed

Explicit criteria are  developed for the  assessment of purported  evidence for early life   on Earth.

Earth’s formation is  better understood

We have an improved  understanding of Earth’s  formation via study of  exoplanets.

Origin of Earth’s   water clarified

Greater clarity is achieved  on the origin of Earth’s  water and the initial  development of oceans  and land.
<<<END_PAGE_304>>>

<<<PAGE_305>>>
Science of the Origins of Life

5.2.4 Exobiology

There is currently no good evidence of life or fossil life on other   worlds in our solar system, let alone on exoplanets in other solar systems.  That may change as we continue exploring other worlds in the solar system.  Even if no living organisms are found elsewhere, our investigations will shed  light on the processes of prebiotic chemistry and primordial geochemistry.25  The planet Mars and the moons Europa, Enceladus and Titan all have or had  environmental conditions similar to parts of Earth. Future missions such as  ExoMars and Europa Clipper — launched late 2024 but not due to arrive at  Europa until 2030 — will provide information about processes that are likely  to have taken place on the young Earth. A key opportunity for the coming  decades will arise with sample-return missions that can bring high-quality  samples back to Earth for detailed study.

Discovering life beyond the solar system remains a possibility, if a remote one.  It is theoretically possible to find indirect evidence of life on an exoplanet, for  example by detecting the presence of oxygen in the atmosphere through  spectroscopic analysis. However, there are issues with interpreting such  detections: on Earth, oxygen is produced only by living organisms, but it is  difficult (if not impossible) to rule out abiotic processes being the cause on   an exoplanet.26 This problem has already bedevilled researchers who detected  methane on Mars and phosphine on Venus, and will be far worse when   dealing with extremely distant worlds.27

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Mars gives clues to Earth- like prebiotic chemistry

Data from the  Perseverance rover on  Mars indicates Earth- like prebiotic chemistry  billions of years ago.

Solvents for life are   better understood

We have good evidence  for whether water is the  only possible solvent for  life. The James Webb  Space Telescope has  given useful information  about the conditions  in which terrestrial  planets formed and  the abundance of  specific organics in such  conditions.

Mars sample   return planned

Examples of life or fossil life  on other worlds are found,  helping to expand or  clarify our definition of life.  A plan for a high-quality  sample-return mission   to Mars is drawn up.

301
<<<END_PAGE_305>>>

<<<PAGE_306>>>
KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS PULSE OF SCIENCE

KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS PULSE OF SCIENCE

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 302

5.3

Mathematics

CHAIR:   Minhyong Kim

Director of the International Centre for  Mathematical Sciences in Edinburgh, UK, and  Edmund Whittaker Professor of Mathematical  Sciences at the University of Edinburgh

CONTRIBUTORS:   Carina Curto, Karthik Ramani, Eric Maskin,  Rashid Sumaila, Terence Tao, Sarah Teichmann,  Nima Arkani-Hamad, Hyejin Youn

Unlike any other discipline, mathematics is   deeply rooted in almost every human culture.   This has been the case for as long as written  records have existed. The practices of counting,  measuring, arranging, quantifying and comparing  objects in the physical world around us is so useful  that we begin to teach them to our children at   a very young age.

The modern academic study of mathematics is a  world away from these basic activities, but remains  an essential part of the functioning of human  civilisation. In the 21st century, mathematical fields  such as linear algebra, differential calculus and  statistical analysis underpin a wide swathe of our  everyday activities, from online shopping to medical  diagnosis.

The field has always been aware of its shortcomings:  mathematics has a long tradition of raising  awareness of unsolved challenges. At the beginning  of the 20th century, for instance, the mathematician  David Hilbert outlined 23 significant challenges,   20 of which now have full or partial solutions.   At the turn of this century, the Clay Institute offered  a $1 million prize for the solution of any of seven  problems, only one of which has been solved so far.

Mathematicians are aware of plenty of other  less-celebrated gaps that also need to be filled,  both for the “completeness” of mathematics and  because those gaps can contain tools useful for the  advancement of humanity’s interests. It has always  been extremely difficult to predict the pace of  progress and breakthrough in mathematics, and to  know which as yet undeveloped mathematical tools  will be useful to academics in other disciplines of the  natural and social sciences. However, it is clear from  past experience that future developments in a variety  of mathematical disciplines will accelerate progress  in science and technology, facilitate greater societal  stability and push forward the frontiers of medicine.

Achieving these advances will require increased  collaboration between mathematicians and  academics from other disciplines, and improvements  in the equity of access to advanced mathematics  education.
<<<END_PAGE_306>>>

<<<PAGE_307>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

Humans have been counting, measuring and  comparing aspects of the physical world, as well as  defining abstract mathematical concepts and their  interactions, for many tens of thousands of years.  While the uses of mathematics have broadened,  some of the central original applications remain,  albeit with significantly more complexity. Modern  mathematics is essential to the study of Nature,  whether that is for understanding our planet’s  past and possible futures, or broader cosmological  considerations. Taking this further will require  new mathematical tools. The wealth of data  available to us in the 21st century has facilitated  the development of Machines that can assist  with the complexity of modern mathematical  calculation and logical inference. With judicious  development, such AI could soon become a useful  tool for mathematicians. Whether in supply chains,  medical technologies, transport logistics or public  administration, the central role of mathematics  in human Society is set to continue. Suitably  applied, mathematical models can assist with the  development of better futures for human groups of  all sizes, though challenges remain. There are also  challenges in applying mathematics to the study  of biological Life, which necessarily involves dealing  with complex components and processes that are  often difficult to formalise as mathematical entities  and procedures. Nonetheless, progress is being  made, raising the possibility that the application   of mathematics can improve future human health  and our scientific understanding of life.

5.3 	 Mathematics

SUB-TOPICS

5.3.1	 Nature

5.3.2	 Machines

5.3.3	 Society

5.3.4	Life

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

Mathematics is poised to fundamentally reshape  scientific and technological frontiers, with experts  anticipating significant breakthroughs across its  various domains. Areas where mathematics intersects  with Machines, particularly AI and robotics, are  seen as holding the most transformative potential,  with impactful advances already being deployed.  While the application of fundamental mathematics  to describe the mechanics of Life also presents  considerable transformative opportunities, there is  a higher degree of uncertainty surrounding these  future breakthroughs. Developments in mathematics  related to Nature and Society are likewise expected  to undergo substantial scientific and technological  shifts, albeit over a longer time frame. Across these  diverse sub-topics, coordinated international action  is frequently highlighted as crucial for exploiting  anticipated opportunities.

MORE INFORMATION

go.gesda.global/math

303
<<<END_PAGE_307>>>

<<<PAGE_308>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

304

Mathematics

5.3.1 Nature

Our understanding of the natural world, in terms of both Earth systems  and deeper physical realities, depends to a large extent on mathematical  modelling. Although this has been valuable in a variety of applications,  phenomena such as climate change have vastly increased the complexity  of the systems that researchers would like to model. For instance, the  ocean‑climate-human system probably involves numerous feedbacks  that are currently beyond mathematical models, as is the economic  quantification of “ecosystem services”.1 This will require innovations  in solving mathematical challenges such as finding solutions to  complex and chaotic equations of fluid flow, and their integration with  models that accurately reflect human behaviour and trends in other  species’s movements and characteristics at a number of scales. Using  higher‑resolution data and more powerful computing resources to build  and explore models will also improve our understanding.2 Programmes that  ensure more equitable access to data and computational resources will  bring much-needed depth and strength to these efforts.

The same is true in fundamental physics and cosmology, where insights   about both the birth and the deep-future fate of the universe strongly   suggest a need for new mathematical ideas and conceptualisations.3   In universe-modelling, previous generations of mathematicians have had  predictive success, but more recently, mathematics has responded to  discoveries by physicists. However, both groups now need to think about  possible new physics and mathematics that will transcend the ideas of  quantum mechanics and space-time that dominated the 20th century.   These new ideas will be simple, rather than complex, baroque constructions.  Insights into novel geometric structures and their properties are proving  promising avenues for advances in fundamental physics,4 and the hope —  based on past trends — is that such advances will trickle down to other  disciplines and fields, seeding progress across the sciences.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Research models effects   of policy on humans

Enhanced mathematics  for studying feedback  loops provides a way to  model human effects  such as the benefits  that result from the  Paris agreement.  This stimulates  further research and  greater confidence  in policy‑making.  Mathematicians provide  conceptual tools for  quantising gravity  where space, time and  quantum mechanics  are secondary, perhaps  emergent, phenomena  and not central  pillars of the model.  Geometric renderings  of physical properties of  fundamental systems  offer insights into ways to  simplify representations  of particle and other  interactions.

Mathematicians quantify  value of ecosystem services

Innovations in  mathematics allow  researchers to quantify  the value of ecosystem  services such as  carbon sequestration.  Bioeconomic models are  enhanced by real‑time  data from satellite  monitoring and other  sources.

AI informs bio-abundance  predictions

AI enables  mathematicians to  reliably predict the  abundance of ocean  species.
<<<END_PAGE_308>>>

<<<PAGE_309>>>
Mathematics

5.3.2

Recent progress in the development of AI and machine learning (ML)   has led to numerous scientific, medical and even societal innovations that  are set to improve the human experience. However, a range of significant  challenges remain.5 Mathematicians are still seeking a clear theoretical  understanding of exactly how and why AI and ML work,6 for example, with  some models showing a mysterious ability to solve mathematical problems  through guesswork in a manner that has yet to be understood. For this and  other reasons, it is likely that AI will be most useful in its performance on  tasks that are extremely challenging for human intelligence, and AI and  human approaches to mathematics could ultimately be complementary  rather than competitive.7

A complication comes from the tendency for AIs doing mathematics to  “hallucinate” mathematical truths in ways that make their output unsuitable for  use in formal proof. As yet, the field has yet to agree on what constitutes a good  set of benchmarks for AI performance in a number of mathematical fields,8,9  making it extremely difficult to measure progress. Nonetheless, it is expected  that theoretical advances in AI and ML will make their mathematics increasingly  reliable and useful for pressing issues such as modelling the interactions of  ocean, human and climate systems, as well as in basic science.10

Generative AI and statistical ML are being used by applied mathematicians  and assisting with the design of physical systems. However, building AI that  understands the real world means building “embodied” AI that works via  the maths-based rules behind real-world physical processes, integrating  symbolic and physical models. This will also produce more robust, efficient  and explainable intelligence. Artificial general intelligence will not be achieved  without new mathematical insights and architectures that unify and streamline  the variety of paths currently being taken.

Machines

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Benchmarks help improve  AI performance in  mathematics

A rolling set of  benchmarks for  measuring AI progress  in solving partial  differential equations  is established. AI assists  formal verification  routines to correct errors  in proofs. Improved  access to data assists ML  modelling of feedback  between ocean, human  and climate systems.  AI integrates symbolic  and physical models for  problem-solving.

AI assists with proofs

AI is able to formally  prove modular parts  of large formal proofs.  Projects that data- dump iterations of  flawed proofs enable AI  to learn how humans  prove theorems. AI  assists a number of  projects centred on  climate change, such as  quantifying the value  of ecosystem services  (carbon sequestration,  for example),  intergenerational  discounting, dynamic  ocean modelling that  manages climate- related displacement of  biomass and integrating  bioeconomic models  into economics.  AI‑driven robotics learns  to mathematically  encode physics through  interaction with the  physical world.

AI ubiquitous in  mathematics research

AI is integrated into  the workflow of most  mathematicians’  research as a  digital assistant for  accomplishing routine  tasks. Mathematical  innovation allows AI- driven robotics systems  to operate safely and  intelligently in human  environments.

305
<<<END_PAGE_309>>>

<<<PAGE_310>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

306

Mathematics

5.3.3 Society

Mathematics is central to much of the work carried out in the social  sciences. Calculus underpins our understanding of economic systems.  Algebra and game theory define the forces at work when we model social  interactions such as elections and responses to policy changes such as  inter-state relations and healthcare provision. A deep grasp of statistics  is vital to the task of anticipating future societal needs and ensuring that  resource management is achieved effectively and efficiently. However,  individual human behaviour resists mathematical modelling11 because of its  complicated nature, including susceptibility to priming and framing effects  that exert considerable influence on short timescales.

Mathematical tools may nonetheless be able to extract rules and descriptions  for human behaviour in the aggregate.12 There are, for instance, mathematical  relationships between quality of societal infrastructure, population size, crime  statistics and income distributions. In addition, understanding the kinds of  network structures that exist in online and other communities, or organisational  structures in particular disciplines, can help to describe and model human  behaviour and characteristics. Such phenomenological modelling can reveal the  core dynamics that drive large-scale transformations in complex systems where  first-principles models are impossible. These insights, if gained with sufficient  mathematical rigour, can be applied to help shape human behaviour, not just to  describe it. Data analysis carried out on societal systems facilitates the exposure of  systemic risks13 or hidden biases, such as might be found in legal, governmental or  corporate decision-making. Mathematically derived insights can also provide ways  to go beyond simple market dynamics, facilitating new, urgently required hybrid  markets such as those needed for sustainable development and healthcare.14  Understanding of social-network structures can help with robust communication  in an information-saturated world, enabling the exchange of ideas beyond the  originator’s bubble or to avoid echo-chamber effects.15

One impediment to progress is not lack of mathematical tools but a lack  of data on human behaviour and decision-making. Historical data is too  sparse to create precise economic models, and there is a dearth of controlled  experiments generating useful, cleanly interpretable data. Mathematically  driven data science can be expected to help fill the gap, maybe incorporating  new advances in the understanding of human behaviour such as that provided  by neuroscience.16

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Data analysis supports   new urban initiatives

Major cities begin  to experiment with  the application of  AI-powered data  analysis and network  theory to design new  urban initiatives.  Mathematicians assist  in efforts to improve  voting systems to create  better-functioning  democracies.

Models predict citizen  response to policy

Experimental economics  helps predict how  citizens will respond,  and how their welfare  will be affected, when  government policy  changes.

Decision-making   forecasts improve

AI and network theory  enable reasonably  accurate forecasting of  human decision-making,  based on patterns of  previous behaviour.
<<<END_PAGE_310>>>

<<<PAGE_311>>>
Mathematics

5.3.4

Whether for medical technologies such as diagnostic imaging, surgical  intervention, prevention of infectious disease outbreaks and cancer treatment,  or for biological applications in neuroscience, genomics and improving  agricultural practices, mathematics plays a central role in our study   of living systems.17

One example is the Human Cell Atlas,18 which aims to make a cellular   and molecular-level resolution three-dimensional map of the human body.  This involves the integration of vast amounts of data, inclusion of annotation   at relevant resolutions and incorporating the facility to interrogate the  underlying data. The mid-term aim is to build a foundation model of the  human body at cellular and molecular resolution.19

In neuroscience, there is a lack of mathematical models to describe  high‑dimensional, non-linear complex systems.20 If the mathematical tools   for describing the dynamics of such systems were to be developed, there  would probably be applications in many other areas, such as economics.

For these projects and others, which promise a revolution in the ability to  understand and engineer the mechanisms of life, lack of data is not always   the main problem, though data for a comprehensive Human Cell Atlas would  be transformational for biology and medicine. Instead, there is a need to  formalise the mathematical requirements of biology21 so that mathematicians  can efficiently and effectively work with biologists to make progress —  there are progress opportunities here for both fields. There is also a need to  understand how deep or complex the models of various systems need to be  in order for progress to be made — not all biological systems require the same  level of granularity for useful analysis.22

Life

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Mathematicians flow   into biology

Collaborations enable  mathematicians to  formalise a number of  key problems facing  biology, encouraging a  flow of mathematicians  into the field.

Neuroscience benefits   from theory-formulation

Theory-formulation takes  over from data analysis  as the prime role of  mathematicians working  in neuroscience.

Mapping initiatives  facilitate clinical research

Success in a number of  mapping initiatives, from  the Human Cell Atlas to  the topology of neuronal  networks, facilitates  clinical research that  improves the outcome  of cancer, dementia and  other treatments.

307
<<<END_PAGE_311>>>

<<<PAGE_312>>>
KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS PULSE OF SCIENCE

KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS PULSE OF SCIENCE

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 308

5.4

5.4

Fungal Biology

CO CHAIRS: 
 Joseph Heitman

Professor in the Department of Molecular Genetics
 & Microbiology at Duke University, North Carolina

Leah Cowen

Professor in the Department of Molecular Genetics  at the University of Toronto, Canada

CONTRIBUTORS: 
 Eva Stukenbrock, Jules Ene, Mat Fisher,  Cameron Currie, Lillian Fritz-Laylin,
 Kabir Peay, Sarah Gurr, Bruce Klein,
 Hailing Jin, Tim James, James Kronstad,
 Julie Segre, David Denning, John Taylor,
 Regine Kahmann, Maria Harrison,
 Neta Shlezinger, Kyla Ost, Ksenia Krasileva,  David Blehert, Charlie Boone, Illiyan Iliev,
 Stanislas Leibler, Salomé LeibundGut-Landmann,  Daniel Croll, Cyril Zipfel, Robbie Loewith,  Terry Roemer, Damian Krysan, Alan Bernstein,  Jolanda van Leeuwen

This brief originated from an anticipation  workshop held at the CIFAR Fungal Kingdom:  Threats & Opportunities Programme Meeting

Fungi are intricately involved with nearly every  organism and ecosystem on Earth. They have  changed the course of human civilisation: their  yeast makes our bread and beer, their self-defence  chemicals underpin important antibiotics1 and  now their enzymes promise breakthroughs from  greener biofuels and waste-water treatment to  potential anti-ageing drugs.

All these applications have come from studying  only about 3 per cent of the estimated 5 million  species that make up this kingdom. This estimate  comes from the range of structures and genes that  have been discovered in partial samples in the wild  that are not associated with a known species. There  is, in other words, significant fungal “dark matter”  that remains to be discovered and catalogued.  Completing such a fungal taxonomy has historically  been a low priority, but recent evidence suggesting  that our interactions with them have changed them  in dangerous ways has moved the taxonomy up the  global agenda.

These changing interactions have arisen because  pressures from climate change, agricultural overuse  of medical antifungals and global trade have forced  fungi into new niches. Emerging and existing fungal  diseases threaten ecological biodiversity, including  frogs, salamanders and bats. The danger they pose  to crops also threatens global food security.2

The long-feared threat of a global fungal pandemic is  growing larger with the emergence of drug‑resistant  strains like Candida auris. The emergence of more  drug-resistant species is inevitable, and mounting a  response will require major investments in research  and infrastructure. Our knowledge of fungi has been  gained from studying just the handful of model  organisms that can be cultured in a laboratory

environment. Investigation of the unknown,  unculturable types remains important but has  been held back by a lack of reliable and advanced  techniques. Developments to deal with this have  been slow to ramp up because most of our scientific  apparatus has been geared to bacterial and viral  threats.

However, change is under way. Genomic surveys  are filling out the fungal family tree, and advanced  imaging technologies and new experimental  models are helping to illuminate the mechanisms  of how fungi invade, which provides new targets for  mitigation. Mitigation strategies include vaccines,  new classes of small-molecule drugs and the  redeployment of gene-editing platforms. It might  even be possible to engineer the fungal microbiome  or virome to reduce the threat they pose.

Future success will depend on computational  advances, including AI and machine learning, and  major interdisciplinary cooperation. The fields of  metabolomics and structural biology, supported  by hi-tech repositories of fungal samples and  isolates, will underpin a culture-free understanding  of fungal structures, including insights into what  determines whether they behave commensally or  pathogenically.
<<<END_PAGE_312>>>

<<<PAGE_313>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

Our understanding of fungal biology is in its   infancy, with perhaps only 3 per cent of Earth’s   fungal organisms currently known and catalogued.  This situation is being improved by research in the lab  and out in the field. Improved healthcare and other  Opportunities from fundamental fungal biology will  arise through measures such as establishing biobanks  of fungi and creating better model organisms, which  should also help mitigate fungal biodiversity loss.  This will be important, as all of Earth’s ecosystems  rely on Fungal ecology and evolution to exploit  opportunities and manage threats. Techniques such  as “shotgun” metagenomics are already helping us to  understand human-fungal interactions and how they  will develop due to external factors such as climate  change. It is vital that we study the Mechanisms  of fungal pathogenesis and symbiosis for this  reason. Emerging pathogens such as valley fever are  probably just the beginning of new threats, given  rising global temperatures and agricultural practices,  both of which can force fungi out of their established  environmental niches and into greater contact with  humans. There is certainly good reason to research  strategies for Combatting fungal pandemics.  Vaccines and targeted fungicides are among the  measures in development, as well as efforts to gain   a better understanding of the fungal microbiome   and virome in order to steer their properties   and behaviour.

5.4 	 Fungal Biology

SUB-TOPICS

5.4.1	 Opportunities from fundamental  fungal biology

5.4.2	Fungal ecology and evolution

5.4.3	Mechanisms of fungal   pathogenesis and symbiosis

5.4.4	Combatting fungal pandemics

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

The field of Fungal Biology is the topic with  the highest Anticipation Potential score, with  breakthroughs anticipated in the near to medium  term. This area holds high transformative potential.  Sub-topics like Opportunities from fundamental  fungal biology and Mechanisms of fungal  pathogenesis and symbiosis are expected to reach  maturity earliest, with significant advances expected  within five years. Despite some uncertainty  regarding future scientific developments, there  is a clear, strong call for multilateral action across  all sub-topics if emerging potential is to be fully  realised. This is especially true for Fungal ecology  and evolution, where collaborative efforts are  crucial for accelerating discovery and developing  novel strategies — especially given the inherent  complexities of fungal systems and evolution.

MORE INFORMATION

go.gesda.global/fung-bio

309
<<<END_PAGE_313>>>

<<<PAGE_314>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

310

Fungal Biology

Opportunities from  fundamental fungal biology  5.4.1

About 150,000 fungal species have been described: physical forms range  from macroscopic mushrooms to single-celled yeasts. It is worth noting that  discoveries made in yeast alone have netted six Nobel prizes. However, some  newly identified genetic and molecular structures are not known to exist  within any of these organisms, which suggests that existing samples represent  only a tiny fraction of the morphological diversity of the fungal kingdom.   There is progress here, though: AI and machine learning and imaging  advances are beginning to help researchers develop a taxonomy.

Furthering research on fungi will require more model organisms. Although  most fungi are difficult if not impossible to culture in the laboratory, their DNA  can be separated from their symbionts and identified using metagenomics,  and editing their genes with CRISPR should make them culturable.   Their interaction with other organisms can be elucidated with new   imaging advances.

Even in some well-characterised species, between 20 and 30 per cent of genes  and gene clusters are either unknown or only hypothetically associated with  human disease, and need to be better characterised. Pangenome approaches  will illuminate biochemical pathways, including those that underpin disease  associations such as the (currently controversial) link between Aspergillus  sydowii and lung cancer.3

Fungal biobanks and seed-bank-like repositories could help decode the  relationship between genotype and phenotype in the same way that biobanks  of genes have helped research.4 Building and maintaining culture collections  are also important tasks if we are to retain archival knowledge of diverse fungal  species, many of which are dying in the mass extinction — and to understand  what spurs fungal evolution and extinction.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Research gains better  knowledge of known fungi

Single-particle analysis  reveals structures at very  high resolution, leading  to drug optimisation.  Rapid advances in  computing power  allow us to reassemble  structures in three  dimensions for modelling  and investigation,  including the molecular  mechanisms of  fungi infecting other  organisms. Metagenomic  sequencing in fungi  matures.

The fungal family tree  is filled in with known  unknowns

Machine learning and  AI allow us to determine  phenotype and behaviour  from DNA. Diverse  new model organisms  can be cultured and  manipulated thanks to  CRISPR. Documenting  fungi gets 10 to 100  times cheaper thanks to  advances in sequencing  technology.

Understanding of the  unknown unknowns  progresses

The function of  “hypothetical” proteins  is characterised to  determine links between  fungi and human  diseases. Metagenomics  characterises specific  fungal strains from scraps  of DNA found in the  wild. New standardised  techniques enable  faster and cheaper  sequencing of genomes.  A repository is built for  globally sourced fungal  culture collections, where  samples are archived  and maintained for  biosecurity and research  purposes.
<<<END_PAGE_314>>>

<<<PAGE_315>>>
Fungal Biology

5.4.2 Fungal ecology and evolution

Fungi play vital roles in all ecosystems: they decompose dead matter   and they are parasites while also being symbionts of animals, plants and  bacteria. That every organism has a microbiome is now a matter of record,  but it is becoming clear that fungi play important but as yet unclear roles   in shaping the structure of these microbial communities. Mycelial networks,  for example, are vast ecological structures that interdigitate with most of life  on Earth, but our understanding of how these systems function is far   from complete.

One way to study commensal fungi is to separate fungal from host genes using  “shotgun” metagenomics,5 a sequencing technique that allows researchers  to study the genomes of entire microbial communities without needing to  culture them first. This has already made it possible to advance the study of the  human skin mycobiome,6 the fungal component of the microbiota.

However, the interactions themselves also need to be studied, which requires  an understanding of community ecology: how organisms interact within  specific habitats. New insights are making it possible to study commensal  strains in living animals — in the gut mycobiome of lab mice,7 for example.  Beyond standard lab-mouse work, novel model systems like hydra are also  being developed to study fungal interactions within microbial communities.

Such approaches will be required to understand important changes we are  making to commensal relationships: fungi, for example, play a crucial role in  promoting carbon capture and in agriculture. This may be changing, however,  as a consequence of synthetic phosphate use in soil.8 The synthetic phosphates  change plants’ long-established symbiotic relationships with fungi, which may  have knock-on effects for farming and for climate change.

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

Fungi are separated   from their niches

Fungal community  ecology catches up  with advanced bacterial  community ecology.  Comparative genomics  reveal how suites of genes  have been transformed  across evolutionary  time and space.  Thanks to long-read  sequencing technologies,  it becomes possible  to tease out plant  and other kingdoms’  genes to isolate fungal  genes. Viruses that  can manipulate fungal  aggression are tested.

Improvements in culturing  and real-world experiments  are achieved

It becomes possible  to put together an  “experimental diorama”  in culture to perform  experiments on relevant  biological communities.  Large agriculture and  forestry trials determine  the extent to which lab  experiments can mimic  real-world scenarios   and provide insights into  combinatorially complex  fungal networks.   New non-toxic  antimicrobials are  discovered in insect- associated fungi that   have evolved to live   non-destructively with  their hosts.

A 21st-century fungal  research infrastructure   is established

The fungal family tree  is completed using a  combination of gene  sequencing from partial  environmental samples  and pattern-matching  using AI and machine  learning.

311
<<<END_PAGE_315>>>

<<<PAGE_316>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

312

Fungal Biology

5.4.3 Mechanisms of fungal   pathogenesis and symbiosis

The mechanisms that make fungi commensal can also make them turn  pathogenic. Their ability to circumvent the immune system, using tricks  including changes to their morphology and metabolism, is useful in both  cases, enabling them to survive within hosts and even host immune cells.

The same fungus can exist as either a commensal or a pathogenic organism.  For example, Candida albicans is an opportunistic fungus that can choose  either lifestyle. As a benign resident of the human microbiome, C. albicans  is an ovoid yeast. However, as it transitions to a pathogen, its shape changes,  extruding filamentous hypha that penetrate host cells. Research is under  way to study the gene products relevant in pathogenesis. The damage done  by C. albicans, for example, is largely attributable to a peptide it secretes,  candidalysin. It has been shown to be essential to the ability of C. albicans   to cause cell damage and host immune activation.

Environmental factors encourage these transitions. Climate change has forced  fungi into new niches as higher temperatures push them to adapt to the sorts  of conditions that have, for millions of years, kept them from colonising warm  mammalian bodies. Additionally, agricultural use of the same few types of  fungicides used in medicine to fight infections have ensured that fungi adapt  to our available drugs, which are now losing efficacy,9 and global trade has  brought non-native species into places that have not evolved defences   against them.

Scientific advances will change the way we study other mechanisms of  pathogenesis and how they arise, take effect and spread. They will also allow  us to identify specific agricultural practices, trade routes and climate problems  that can be targeted for biosecurity interventions.

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Sequencing traces   infection routes

Fungal-genome  sequencing help to  trace routes of infection  into groups of hosts not  previously exposed to  a particular pathogen.  AI tools help begin to  identify effectors in other  fungal pathogens.

Pathogen identification  improves

New fungal pathogens,  emerging due to climate  and environmental  change, are increasingly  identified. Diagnostics in  hospitals become rapid  and routine.

Technological advances  accelerate precautionary  action

Fast detection and  advances in modelling  and simulation lead to  the ability to quickly  shut down trade routes  to prevent the spread  of fungal pathogens  that harm wildlife and  humans.
<<<END_PAGE_316>>>

<<<PAGE_317>>>
Fungal Biology

5.4.4 Combatting fungal pandemics

The major fungal pathogens include Candida albicans, Cryptococcus  neoformans and Aspergillus fumigatus. These may cause direct or indirect  harm. For example, the emerging fungal pathogen behind Candidozyma  auris infection, first identified in 2009, is becoming a widespread hospital  threat, with the number of infections growing by 59 per cent between  2019 and 2020, and by 95 per cent between 2021 and 2022.10 But even  strains that do not harm humans directly may harm them indirectly: while  Pseudogymnoascus destructans — which causes white-nose syndrome in  bats — was thought to be primarily a threat to biodiversity,11 its downstream  consequences for ecosystem stability have been linked to increased human  infant illness and death. Aspergillus sydowii affects coral reefs but has also  spread into hospitals, where it causes respiratory infections. It has also been  (controversially) found to drive lung-cancer progression.

Mitigation strategies include vaccines and RNA interference (via extracellular  vesicles as a promising route),12 new small-molecule drugs and natural  compounds that are isolated from bacteria and other sources where  anti‑fungal strategies have evolved. There is a need to replace broad-spectrum  agricultural fungicides that poison the entire kingdom, moving towards a  more tailored approach involving targeted fungicides that leave soil-fungal  communities intact, lock down carbon and do not cause resistance in clinical  anti‑fungals. Research into these tailored approaches is ongoing but not   yet mature.

More positively, two novel small-molecule anti‑fungals — olorofim and  fosmanogepix — are now in phase III trials.13 New synthetic chemicals are also  being developed, as well as new approaches for delivering them. Manipulating  the fungal microbiome or virome may guide their behaviour into being more  favourable for us.

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

New drugs are deployed

Results from phase III trials  of novel anti‑fungals yield  new drugs to deploy in  hospitals. Experimental  and computer models  help illuminate the  mechanisms of how fungi  invade, which provide  targets for mitigation.  Vaccination strategy  and insights in bats that  helped mitigate the  damage of white-nose  syndrome (including  grooming spread)  reduce the impact of the  next pandemic. A new  small-molecule drug  is discovered. Passive  surveillance technology  allows monitoring of the  next pandemic threat.

Control and development   of anti‑fungals improves

New anti‑fungals that  do not interfere with  clinical anti‑fungals are  developed for agriculture.  A major pharmaceutical  company starts human  trials with newly  discovered natural  products. Active  surveillance technology  prevents fungal  pathogens emerging.  Vaccines are developed  against major fungal  threats.

Real-time pandemic  prediction and control  becomes possible

Predictive biology  combines mechanistic  models, ecological  insights, surveillance  and in vivo data on  pathogenesis into  real-time pandemic  prediction and control.

313
<<<END_PAGE_317>>>

<<<PAGE_318>>>
KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS PULSE OF SCIENCE

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 314

5.5

Archaeology

CO CHAIRS:   Sylvian Fachard

Full Professor in the Institute of Archeology and  Classical Studies at the University of Lausanne,  Switzerland

Anna-Sapfo Malaspinas

Leader of the Population Genomics Group in the  Department of Computational Biology at the  University of Lausanne

CONTRIBUTORS:   Qiaomei Fu, Sarah Murray, Kathrin Nägele,  Philip Sapirstein, Christina Warinner

Advances in science and technology are reshaping  archaeology in multiple ways, with new techniques  significantly enhancing both practice and  knowledge. Molecular techniques enable valuable  data to be extracted from fragmentary remains  and even from sites that lack discernible artefacts.  This is shedding new light on past diseases and  pathologies, diets and even migrations.

New and improved dating techniques mean that  some ancient artefacts can be directly and precisely  dated, reducing the need for educated guesswork.  Improved excavation methods are revealing subtle  traces of past human activity, and of climatic  and ecological shifts, that would previously have  gone unnoticed. As in other fields, AI is beginning  to be used and has already led to significant  breakthroughs.

As a result, questions that were previously  unanswerable can now be approached, and  concepts that were once taken for granted have  been assigned greater nuance or even disregarded.  However, certain problems remain to be solved.   One is that archaeology is afflicted by severe  preservation bias. Materials such as stone can  survive well in archaeological deposits, while more  perishable substances like wood are prone to decay  rapidly. As a consequence, our understanding   of the past is skewed towards materials that   survive and regions of the world with good  preservation conditions.

The field also faces many equity issues. Researchers  from the Global South are under-represented in  the field generally, while also being particularly  under-represented in more technical fields such  as molecular-level analysis.1 There is also a need to  clarify questions of ownership of ancient materials,  which are often cross-national. And the field has  yet to deal with a legacy of betrayal of Indigenous  peoples by past generations of archaeologists.

There is also an urgent need for many more  open-access online databases and standardised  formatting to improve the general accessibility  of archaeological data. Nonetheless, a growing  diversity of peoples and approaches in archaeology  is questioning long-standing dogmas. A more  nuanced understanding of concepts like gender,  hierarchy and societal resilience is reshaping our  understanding of many past societies, providing  a dynamic narrative that, along with the new  generation of tools and techniques, offers reasons   for optimism concerning future developments   in the field.
<<<END_PAGE_318>>>

<<<PAGE_319>>>
KEY TAKEAWAYS ANTICIPATION SURVEY RESULTS

New scientific techniques have proved a boon to  archaeology, enabling researchers to fill gaps in data  and answer previously unanswerable questions  about the past. Progress in Molecular-level analysis  of ancient human remains has enabled the  extraction of ancient human DNA even when no  other remains are extant. The field of proteomics has  supplemented this, providing valuable information  about remains even where no viable DNA exists.  In-depth isotopic analysis has revealed new details  of hominin diets. Similar techniques have allowed  the Molecular-level analysis of ancient non-human  remains, revealing details about the ecosystems,  diet, illnesses and existential threats associated with  hominin life across a broad sweep of space and time.  Scientific advances are also improving Palaeoclimate  studies, allowing links to be made between extreme  climatic events and societal disruptions, potentially  giving insights into the adaptability and resilience of  ancient hominin populations. Advances in remote  sensing, isotopic analysis, non-invasive scanning and  radio-dating techniques are Exposing and decoding  world heritage with unprecedented clarity, providing  new insights into the origins of artefacts, the extent  of ancient trade networks and the details of cultural  achievements.

5.5 	 Archaeology

SUB-TOPICS

5.5.1	 Molecular-level analysis  of ancient human remains

5.5.2	 Molecular-level analysis  of ancient non-human remains

5.5.3	 Palaeoclimate studies

5.5.4	Exposing and decoding  world heritage

SURVEY OBSERVATIONS

New interdisciplinary approaches to archaeology  are transforming and accelerating the field. Major  breakthroughs are less than five years away and will  be very impactful for the future of research in this  area. But this will require the collection and analysis  of material spread out across continents and nations  and therefore will rely on strong, internationally  coordinated action.

MORE INFORMATION

go.gesda.global/archaeo

315
<<<END_PAGE_319>>>

<<<PAGE_320>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

316

Archaeology

5.5.1 Molecular-level analysis of ancient  human remains

Thanks to scientific and technical advances, mostly developed in the past  25 years, it is now possible to extract multiple forms of molecular data from  the remains of ancient humans. The host of available new techniques are  being rapidly enhanced, enabling faster analyses that extend further back  in time and obtain increasingly detailed information about human origins,  migrations, diets and other questions.2

The most prominent molecular technique is the extraction and analysis   of ancient DNA.3 Genetic material obtained from bones and other remains  has yielded near-complete genome sequences from tens of thousands of  years ago. As well as dramatic results like Neanderthal-human interbreeding,  ancient DNA has revealed when and how humans have migrated throughout  the world as well as family relationships and kinship patterns.4 More recent  techniques have even enabled extraction of ancient DNA from sediments,  allowing species to be identified when no physical remains are left.5  Researchers are now developing techniques for obtaining ancient   DNA underwater.6

More recently, proteomics has been developed to a high standard.   Certain proteins preserve better than DNA, notably in teeth, so proteomics  can sometimes be used even when all DNA has been lost.7 While not as  informative as DNA, these proteins can be used to identify species, as well  as traits such as sex. Proteins can also be recovered from dental calculus  (mineralised dental plaque), and entrapped dietary proteins in calculus can  be used to reconstruct detailed information about foods that are otherwise  archaeologically invisible, such as dairy products and spices.

Researchers can also now make extensive use of isotopes to reveal details such  as the diets of ancient humans,8 providing evidence of the consumption of  meat, fish and plants.9,10 While isotope chemistry is a long-standing field, new  isotopic systems are regularly introduced and new applications identified.11

Combined with other forms of evidence such as microwear on teeth, these  analyses have significantly altered our ideas about past hominins’ diets.12

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Larger datasets provide  new insights

More comprehensive  reconstructions of  lifestyles of past human  populations become  possible, including  societal behaviours like  family norms and social  structure. Evolutionary  pressures such as  selection can be inferred  directly from large  numbers of ancient  genomes. Significant  improvements in data  archiving and metadata  for archaeology are  made, such as the ability  to tag genomic datasets  as ancient.

AI reconstructs ancient  life stories

Discoveries facilitate  systematic estimates  of population size and  interpersonal interactions  in past societies. AI makes  it possible to integrate  ancient DNA with other  data to create life stories  of ancient peoples. Global  biobanks for human  biological resources,  such as data and ancient  DNA libraries, enable  improved access and  more analyses.

Interdisciplinarity provides  new archaeological tools

Archaeology becomes  more interdisciplinary,  enabling the  development of  principles governing  past human societies.  Gene editing is used to  restore adaptations from  particular populations in  specific environments,  enabling study of  their function. New  technologies to study  DNA in situ within a  fossil — that is, without  extraction — allow the  acquisition of high- quality ancient DNA  from more than 1 million  years ago.
<<<END_PAGE_320>>>

<<<PAGE_321>>>
Archaeology

5.5.2 Molecular-level analysis of ancient  non-human remains

Molecular data has enabled archaeologists to reconstruct flora and fauna,  including pathogens, from ancient environments. This tells us about the  ecosystems in which ancient peoples lived and how they affected them.  Analyses of pathogens reveal the diseases and epidemics suffered by past  societies, where diseases come from and how pathogens evolve. This is vital  information for avoiding or preparing to face future pandemics.

Animals, plants and other organisms can be identified from their physical  remains, from DNA and from proteomics. A particularly valuable technique  developed in the last decade is ZooMS, which involves extracting protein from  tiny fragments of bone in order to identify species.13 This has enabled the  identification of animal foods in ancient hominin sites14 and revealed hominins’  interactions with other large animals.15,16

These new techniques have also enabled us to revise our understanding   of the environments in which hominins lived17 and to tease out the interactions  between humans and their environments. There is growing evidence that our  ancestors and relatives had negative impacts,18 contributing to the extinctions  of many species, especially large “megafauna”.19 Environmental shifts also  impacted hominins and their evolution,20,21 even driving the evolution of new  species.22

The reconstruction of ancient pathogens relies on the ability to separate  pathogen DNA from that of its human host.23 Combined with existing  techniques, such as identifying traces of disease on skeletons and burial  patterns,24 such studies help us understand the ecology and evolution  of diseases. They also reveal how societies and technologies, such as the  invention of farming, have impacted the spread of pathogens.25 In addition,  they offer support for the contention that human health is inextricably  connected with ecosystems, as suggested in the One Health model.26

25-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 5-YEAR HORIZON

More pathogen genomes  are sequenced

There is a rapid  increase in numbers  of microbial genomes  sequenced, including  palaeopathogens.  Molecular evidence  like DNA and  palaeoproteomics  becomes sufficiently  precise to track  mutations and selection  pressures on past  organisms.

Past ecosystems are  reconstructed through AI  and environmental DNA

AI enables identification  of the most common  flora and fauna  specimens, such as  pollen and teeth.  Environmental DNA  from sediments and  other sources is routinely  used to reconstruct  past ecosystems.  Researchers reconstruct  past food webs using a  combination of isotope  analyses, tooth wear and  other tools.

Drivers of past extinctions  brought to light

High-resolution  ecological models  are applied to  reconstructions of past  ecosystems, enabling  analyses of drivers of  significant shifts such as  extinctions. Researchers  construct a global history  of hominin diseases from  the origin of our species  to the present.

317
<<<END_PAGE_321>>>

<<<PAGE_322>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

318

Archaeology

5.5.3 Palaeoclimate studies

Improvements in technology and methods are enabling ever more precise  sampling of past climates, known as palaeoclimates. Traditional data sources  such as tree rings have been supplemented with additional sources like  speleothems (stalagmites and stalactites) as well as isotope geochronology.  These are making it possible to reconstruct not just average temperatures  and rainfalls, but also seasonality and extreme events such as droughts.  Climate-related phenomena such as changing sea levels and palaeotsunamis  are also being reconstructed in unprecedented detail. The dataset has also  been extended further back in time, with palaeoclimate data spanning   the entire 7 million years of hominin evolution. However, significant   gaps remain.27

The accumulating palaeoclimate data enables archaeologists to link ancient  climatic trends and events with hominin evolution and historical events.28  Shifts in climate, and the associated modifications to ecosystems, have been  associated with key moments in hominin evolution in Africa,29,30 including  diversification and the formation of new species.31 Similarly, climatic impacts  on distributions of hominin species have been identified.32,33,34,35 In some cases,  palaeoclimate data suggests where hominins might have lived during periods  where no actual archaeological data can be found.36

Data suggests that extreme climatic events may be linked to societal  disruptions like wars and even collapses. Understanding how and why   some societies endured while others folded may offer insight for our own  climate-threatened future.37,38

There is an urgent need to gather palaeoclimate data as rapidly and widely   as possible because contemporary climate change is erasing many key forms  of evidence, such as the air bubbles trapped inside the ice of glaciers that are  now melting.39

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

A greater range of  past climate conditions  are explored

New and improved  palaeoclimate proxies  enable the sampling  of a greater range of  past conditions, such  as pressure and wind  regimes. Cheaper  and more accessible  sampling techniques  facilitate the expansion  of palaeoclimate  studies to previously  understudied regions,  such as Central Asia and  South America.

Palaeoclimate  reconstructions become  more reliable

Researchers achieve  standardised  methods for assessing  palaeoclimate proxies,   in particular for  controlling for  confounding factors,  enabling reliable  and systematic  reconstructions.  Reliable identification  of multi‑centennial  trends and cycles in  palaeoclimate becomes  possible.

The impacts of climate  change on hominin history  are clarified

Research achieves  high-resolution global  palaeoclimate records  for the entire span of  hominin evolution —  that is, from 7 million  years ago to the present.  This enables detailed  reconstruction of the  impacts of climatic  change on hominin  evolution and hominin  habitats. Massive  online databases of  palaeoclimate data  improve accessibility of  information and enable  new analyses.
<<<END_PAGE_322>>>

<<<PAGE_323>>>
Archaeology

5.5.4 Exposing and decoding world heritage

Archaeology is now able to take advantage of a range of methods and  technologies for revealing, recording and preserving hominin artefacts.  Some of these operate at the landscape scale: satellite technology and  LiDAR (light detection and ranging) are increasingly used to identify  habitations and other large-scale structures.40,41 These techniques are  particularly useful in inaccessible regions such as dense forest.   Many ancient settlements and geoglyphs in the Amazon rainforest have  been identified by airborne LiDAR,42,43 and some researchers are exploring  LiDAR’s usefulness for underwater archaeology.44

At smaller scales, advances in the use of isotopes, including non-traditional  isotopes, are enabling archaeologists to trace the materials in artefacts like  swords back to their mineral sources.45,46 These studies are revealing continent- spanning exchange networks long before empires or modern globalisation.47  Similarly, new dating techniques like uranium-thorium are proving invaluable  for determining the age of artefacts such as rock art, providing some of the  first hard evidence that other hominins, such as Neanderthals, made art.48   AI is also proving useful. It has helped to identify the chemical signatures   of heating in ancient rocks, for example, providing evidence of the controlled  use of fire a million years ago.49

New methods are being brought to bear on the interpretation and decoding  of artefacts. Photogrammetry, which enables the three-dimensional scanning  of artefacts, is increasingly used to reveal hidden details and patterns.50 AI can  restore degraded ancient texts and identify their sources and ages.51 Similarly,  ancient scrolls that are tightly wrapped and damaged can now be 3D-scanned  and some of the text read.52

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

5-YEAR HORIZON 10-YEAR HORIZON 25-YEAR HORIZON

Technology enables  digitalisation and sharing  of knowledge

Rapid and accurate  three-dimensional  digitalisation of  artefacts, buildings and  landscapes becomes  possible. Customisable  laser scanning  equipment is used for  rapid assessment of  different-sized artefacts.  Cheaper and faster  internet facilitates more  equitable data-sharing.

Standardisation improves  archaeological insight

Global standardisation of  archaeological protocols  enables systematic  comparisons, increasing  depth of insight. There  is a new, widespread  availability of experimental  methods for completing  and interpreting  damaged and incomplete  texts, such as clarifying  strokes and inscriptions.  AI-based translators  give approximate  translations of texts  in ancient languages.  Higher-resolution  scanners, going beyond  the current 20-micron  limit to 1 micron or less,  enable finer analysis of  cut marks and other  forms of wear, while  higher-resolution LiDAR,  down to 1 centimetre,  improves aerial analysis  of structures.

Scanning improvements  give new views of artefacts

Three-dimensional  scans extend beyond  the visible spectrum,  for instance including  data on the composition  of pigments on  surfaces or materials  in soil. AI enables  much faster analyses  of large numbers of  artefacts, speeding  up “routine” work  and data publication.  Regular global LiDAR  coverage reveals — and  monitors — heritage  sites.

319
<<<END_PAGE_323>>>

<<<PAGE_324>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

320 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

INVITED CONTRIBUTION

Using reference   genomes to decode   Earth’s biodiversity

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-5-IC-1

Mark Blaxter

Head of the Tree of Life Programme and Senior  Group Leader at the Wellcome Sanger Institute,  Cambridgeshire, UK

Mara Lawniczak

Senior Group Leader in the Tree of Life Programme  at the Wellcome Sanger Institute
<<<END_PAGE_324>>>

<<<PAGE_325>>>
Genomics — that is, reading and recording the  unique genetic codes of organisms — is a young  science, but one that holds enormous potential.  Sequencing the genomes of a tiny fraction of  the species that inhabit our planet has led to  enormous advances in our understanding of their  development and function, and increasingly to  breakthrough applications in fields ranging from  biomedicine to eco-augmentation. Imagine, then,  how many discoveries and advances remain to  be unlocked within the genomes of all the other  organisms of planet Earth.

The Earth BioGenome Project aims to change biology  forever by unveiling the genomes of all described  eukaryotic species — that is, all animals and plants,  as well as protists (single-celled organisms) and  fungi — within 10 years.1,2 The Earth BioGenome  Project will be transformational, changing how we  analyse the characteristics of species and the ways  they interact, as well as their capacity to adapt to rapid  ecological change. This is not a fanciful proposition —  on the contrary, its foundations have already been  laid through efforts to democratise access to  genome‑sequencing tools and techniques.

The Tree of Life Programme was launched at the  Wellcome Sanger Institute in Cambridgeshire, UK,  and is a major contributor to the Earth BioGenome  Project. Our Tree of Life has started close to home  with the Darwin Tree of Life project, where we have  already sequenced more than 2000 species found  in the UK and Ireland. Having honed our tools, built  collaborations and developed new methods to  overcome technical challenges, we are also supporting  the spread of knowledge and training into new regions  harbouring high-density biodiversity that are eager  to become sequencing hotspots. We are talking  to colleagues in the Caribbean and in Guyana, and  working with the African BioGenome Project as they  initiate projects across the continent. Such projects  have the potential to generate scientific knowledge  and economic value in which local communities   must rightfully have a stake.

We are developing toolkits and protocols by working  with our local biodiversity, and making these available  to the world once proven. Our approach is “sequence  locally, think globally.” Our system has been remarkably  successful: our projects currently deliver about half  of all the reference genomes produced anywhere in  the world, and should total around 3400 genomes by  the end of 2025. The number of described eukaryotic  species is around 1.6 million, so there is a long way to  go. However, with advancing technologies and joint  effort from additional projects under the EBP umbrella,  this figure is not as far off as it might first appear.

We are already beginning to use AI tools to help us,   for instance in checking that the fragments that make  up a genome have been assembled in the right order.  In the past few years there have been significant  advances in the sequencing instruments themselves.  In the future, we expect to be able to sequence a  genome using a mobile phone or whatever device  people will then be carrying around. Sequencing is  continuously becoming faster and more affordable.  One of the exciting applications of cheaper, faster  sequencing is the ability to explore the species present  in an area through what is known as environmental  DNA or “eDNA”. Air, water and soil can be sequenced  and species can be detected as having recently  been present through bits of DNA they leave behind.  However, to truly realise the possibilities that eDNA  offers, such as invasive pest detection through air- filter sequencing at national borders, we need the  library of all genomes to be able to match each eDNA  molecule to the organism it came from. The faster we  can complete the reference genomes of all species, the  sooner eDNA monitoring will become a widespread  approach that is broadly useful to conservation, food  security, pandemic surveillance and beyond.

321
<<<END_PAGE_325>>>

<<<PAGE_326>>>
PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

PULSE OF SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

322 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

One of the questions that comprehensive reference  genomes can answer is this: how does a blind process  like evolution “invent” something? That is key to  advances in synthetic biology, biotechnology and  medicine. For example, there are lots of organisms  out there that make venom, which then interferes  with the immune system or nervous system —  we would call these pharmaceuticals if we had  invented them ourselves. A bee sting contains lots  of chemicals that hurt but also others that numb. In  fact, every venomous animal offers a whole inventory  of biologically active molecules: anti-inflammatories,  painkillers, immune suppressants and more, all of  them with potential for medical use by humans.

Genomes for all Earth’s species will help us to   realise those medical applications — for example,   by providing critical input to AI-powered research  systems like Google DeepMind’s AlphaFold system,  which advances biological research in any number  of ways by using AI to work out the likely structure  of protein molecules. Or, as another example, the  Generative and Synthetic Genomics programme at   the Wellcome Sanger Institute seeks to understand  how particular DNA sequences drive the expression   of specific genes. Comparing the genomes of different  species will help us to pin down these genetic  “switches”, offering us much more control over  modified or synthetic genomes.

The most exciting possibilities, however, are not the  ones we can already see, but the ones that will only  become apparent once this massive genomic resource  exists — and the faster these emerging opportunities  become apparent, the more quickly we can translate  this new information into transformational knowledge  across a range of scientific fields and applications   (see figure). The good news is that it would be  quite easy to scale up our operations to meet these  objectives. Our current target, in Phase One of the  Earth BioGenome Project, is to complete 10,000  genomes. Phase Two aims for 150,000 genomes: with  additional centres it could produce 1000 genomes a  year, thus reaching that target in just a few years.

Those additional centres, each costing about £5 million,  should be based in some of the most biodiverse  hotspots around the world. Our own Darwin Tree   of Life project is very locally based and nationally  focused. National and commercial interest can provide  valuable incentives to complete the work, as long as  the data is publicly available and remuneration flows  back to the centres.

Sovereignty and ownership of digital sequence  information is the final piece of the puzzle: fortunately,  there are good options here. One is that those who  actually do the work of producing a sequence could  submit it to one or more international databases and  immediately get benefits back, in the form of some  sort of credit for building the local bioeconomy or  for conservation. It would be possible to implement  a system in which the users of genomic data pay in  advance into a fund which then pays out to those who  are producing the data.

At the Wellcome Sanger Institute we have a group   of academics working in a partnership with the private  sector called Open Targets. This group is funded  to identify and develop drug targets via discovery  research. The companies decide what sort of things  they’re interested in funding: finding new targets or  drug candidates, for example. Sanger researchers do  the basic genomic research on potential drug targets,  and the pharma companies get an early look at areas  of commercial interest to them. A similar model might  be applied to “Open Genomes”, in which companies  fund research into areas of specific interest — perhaps  venomous species — so that these are sequenced   as soon as possible.
<<<END_PAGE_326>>>

<<<PAGE_327>>>
Sequencing centres for the Earth BioGenome Project  around the world could serve just this purpose,  sequencing local biodiversity and building reference  genomes for species that are interesting to biotech  companies, as well as contributing to the global  scientific commons. This kind of system would foster  autonomous indigenous bioeconomies in biodiversity  hotspots. We will need international organisations to  run such a system, however, and the importance and  urgency of this need is reflected in its inclusion on  the agenda of the November 2025 COP30 meeting in  Belém, Brazil. Diplomacy also has a job to do in raising  awareness of genomics. International biodiversity  conventions and assessments don’t usually mention  the genetic diversity of the species we’re trying to  conserve. That needs to change.

The final hurdle is, of course, funding. The first single  human genome cost around $3 billion. Advances  in technology mean that we can now sequence  individual genomes for a cost in the low thousands  of dollars, and that will drop still further. Right now,  it is eminently conceivable that sequencing every  eukaryotic species on the planet won’t cost much  more than the price tag for that first human   genome sequence — perhaps $4 billion. And as   with that first human reference genome, the rewards  will be immeasurable.

® Image: Luke Lythgoe

323
<<<END_PAGE_327>>>

<<<PAGE_328>>>
PULSE OF DIPLOMACY KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

PULSE OF DIPLOMACY KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

324 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS

Nourishing science   culture

5	 Knowledge Foundations

From understanding our place in the cosmos to  eradicating fatal diseases, scientific progress is  one of humankind’s greatest achievements, yet  generative AI and social media are changing the  very nature of scientific evidence as we know it.

In an era of evolving globalisation, connectivity and  political polarisation, how can decision‑makers  ensure that science continues to make progress  for the benefit of all?

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/26-PD-5-1

PARTICIPANTS

Moderated by:

Opening remarks:

With:

Katherine Mathieson

Director of the Royal Institution, UK.

Luciano Floridi

Founding Director of the Digital Ethics Center   at Yale University.

Urs Gasser

Professor for Public Policy, Governance and  Innovative Technology at the Technical University   of Munich, Germany

Ayaka Suzuki

Director of the Strategic Planning and Monitoring  Unit in the Executive Office of the Secretary-General,  United Nations.

Stephen J. Toope

President and CEO of the Canadian Institute   for Advanced Research.

TAKEAWAY MESSAGES:

“Science cannot offer certainty,  and truth is not fixed for all  time. This is hard for both the  public and scientists themselves  to accept.”

“Science offers a model of  how to make decisions despite  uncertainty and different points  of view.”

“Trust in science is weakening.  It now demands social  equity and environmental  sustainability as well as  functional reliability. Scientists  must listen more to what the  public wants.”

“Manipulation of information   is a big challenge.”
<<<END_PAGE_328>>>

<<<PAGE_329>>>
325
<<<END_PAGE_329>>>

<<<PAGE_330>>>
PULSE OF IMPACT KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS PULSE OF IMPACT KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar® 326

Media-Innovation Analysis

While Mathematics sees a lesser increase  in media mentions despite its strong  performance in terms of patents filed,   The Science of the Origins of Life has seen   a sharp decrease in both its media presence  and in terms of its scientific output.

LEGEND:

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/5-impact

YoY PATENT GROWTH  YoY growth of topic mentions  from May 2023-Apr 2024 to  May 2024-Apr 2025

YoY MEDIA GROWTH  YoY growth of granted topic  patents from May 2023-Apr 2024  to May 2024-Apr 2025.

LOW HIGH

YoY PATENT GROWTH2

LOW YoY MEDIA GROWTH1

5.3 Mathematics

MEDIA-INNOVATION MATRIX

5.5 Archaeology 5.1 Synthetic Biology

5.4 Fungal Biology

5.2 The Science of the Origins of Life

HIGH
<<<END_PAGE_330>>>

<<<PAGE_331>>>
CUMULATIVE INVESTMENT IN SYNTHETIC BIOLOGY COMPANIES

70000

CUMULATIVE INVESTMENT (MILLIONS USD)

60000

50000

40000

30000

20000

10000

0

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

NUMBER OF NEW INVESTMENTS IN SYNTHETIC BIOLOGY COMPANIES

NUMBER OF INVESTMENTS

400

300

200

100

0

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

NUMBER OF NEWLY FOUNDED SYNTHETIC BIOLOGY COMPANIES

120

NUMBER OF NEWLY FOUNDED COMPANIES

100

80

60

40

20

0

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

IMPACT FOCUS

5.4 Investment and   Company Creation   in Synthetic Biology

Synthetic biology as a field first captured the  attention of private investors in 2010, with the first  complete synthesis of a working bacterial genome  by a team at the J. Craig Venter Institute. This was  followed in 2012 with the work of Jennifer Doudna  and Emmanuelle Charpentier on the gene editing  system CRISPR-Cas9. This has led to a steady growth  of private investments in the field, accelerating after  2017 upon the convergence of synthetic biology and  artificial intelligence with the release of Deepmind’s  revolutionary AlphaFold. The rate of investment  in synthetic biology shows no signs of slowing,  reflecting the acute interest of the private sector in  biotech solutions for both health and environmental  applications.

Source, facing page: Deep View analysis from 1 May 2022 to  30 April 2024; (1) YoY media growth = YoY growth of topic  mentions from May 2022/April 2023 to May 2023/Apr 2024; (2)  YoY patent growth = YoY growth of granted topic patents from  May 2022/April 2023 to May 2023/Apr 2024.

Source, this page: Pitchbook  *Data on newly founded companies in 2023 is incomplete and  will be updated once first funding is raised. Projections indicate  similar levels of company creation to 2021.

327
<<<END_PAGE_331>>>

<<<PAGE_332>>>
PULSE OF SOCIETY KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

PULSE OF SOCIETY KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

328 2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

What do people say?  An analysis of mainstream media articles, blog  posts and scientific articles over a period of  12 months shows that the sentiment about  Knowledge Foundations is cautiously optimistic,  led by India, the USA and Nigeria, reflecting the  positive momentum in healthcare and culture.  However, this is tempered by sentiment around  heritage conflicts and health threats. Interest in  foundation science topics did drop this year, with  Synthetic Biology, The Science of the Origins  of Life and Mathematics all experiencing a  decrease in coverage compared to the previous  year. Archaeology has the highest impact in  public discourse, accounting for 44% of all media  discussions in Knowledge Foundations.

MAINSTREAM MEDIA SENTIMENT

Positive          Neutral          Negative

MAINSTREAM MEDIA 1 May 2024 - 30 April 2025

UNIQUE ARTICLES

VISUALISED ARTICLES

NET SENTIMENT

ARTICLE UNIQUENESS

1 May 2024 - 30 April 2025 SOCIAL MEDIA

NUMBER OF POSTS

VISUALISED POSTS

NET SENTIMENT

UNIQUE IMPRESSIONS

78% 15%

759k 6k 85% 59%

5,084k 9.1k 50% 258b

China Focus UAE Rich Heritage

China Focus UAE Rich Heritage

Korean Culture

Korean Culture

Art & Artists

Art & Artists Nobel Prize

Machine Learning

Machine Learning

Interview

Interview

Innovation

Innovation

Programs

Programs

AI Development

AI Development

Sharjah Archaeology Award

Sharjah Archaeology Award

Beijing Central Axis

Beijing Central Axis

Saudi Arabia Oil Development

Saudi Arabia Oil Development

Nobel Prize

Mathematics

Mathematics

Climate

Climate

Management

Management

Breakthrough

Breakthrough

Awards Program

Awards Program

FinTech & Financial

FinTech & Financial

Risk

Risk

China Cambodia

China Cambodia

Japan SADO Mines

Japan SADO Mines

Biology of Universe

Biology of Universe

Origin of Life

Origin of Life

Israel, Gaza Heritage Site

Israel, Gaza Heritage Site

Human Evolution

Human Evolution

UNESCO World Heritage

UNESCO World Heritage

Ancient Rome

Ancient Rome

Egypt Pyramid Construction

Egypt Pyramid Construction

Kuwait

Kuwait

Origin of Australia

Origin of Australia

Archaeological

Archaeological

Fungal Disease

Fungal Disease

Breakthrough

Breakthrough

Fungal Ecology

Fungal Ecology

Cultural Heritage

Cultural Heritage

Assam PM Modi

Assam PM Modi

Excavation

Excavation

Archaeological

Archaeological

Excavation

Excavation

Iran

Iran
<<<END_PAGE_332>>>

<<<PAGE_333>>>
DEMOGRAPHICS & SENTIMENT PER REGION

North America

61% 27% 12%

+ Machine Learning

+ Cultural Heritage

+ Blockchain Tech

GLOBAL SENTIMENT

•	Sentiment around Knowledge Foundations remain broadly neutral across  most regions, with Asia and Africa exhibiting more positive sentiment,  largely driven by healthcare innovations, community engagement, and the  application of blockchain technologies in research and cultural preservation.  In contrast, political tensions around heritage sites and emerging health threats  contribute to a more negative outlook in parts of Europe and the Middle East.

•	Discussions continue to highlight the importance of cultural heritage and social  development, while emerging technologies like blockchain are viewed as enablers  of transparency and efficiency in knowledge preservation. However, environmental  concerns present challenges to maintaining a universally optimistic narrative.

- Heritage Ruin

- AI Misuse

- Pathogen Spread

Latin America

+ Machine Learning

+ Cultural Heritage

+ Innovation

73% 20%6% 65% 22% 13%

- Ecosystem Collapse

- Climate Change

- Pathogen Spread

Europe

61% 28% 11%

+ Machine Learning

+ Cultural Development

+ Intelligence

Africa

+ Creator Trade

+ Cultural Heritage

+ Future Proof

- Heritage Loss

- Exploitation

- Lack of Tech

- Workforce loss

- Exploitation

- Lack of Resources

•	Participation is heavily led by India in Asia (75%) and the United States in North  America (90%). In South America, Mexico (41%) has overtaken Brazil (12%) as the  primary contributor. In Europe, the United Kingdom (42%) and Germany (12%)  are the leading voices.

•	Africa’s conversation is led by Nigeria (36%) and South Africa (23%), while in  Oceania, Australia (84%) dominates and in Middle East, Saudi Arabia (6%).

Source: Deep View social media analysis from 05/01/2024-04/30/2025; Note: English-speaking social media

postings; re-posts were excluded from the analysis.

MENA

67% 25% 8%

+ Evolution

+ Cultural Development

+ Innovation

- Malware

- Political Threat

- War

Russia & Asia

58% 29% 14%

+ Land Research

- Climate Disruption

- Cyber Attacks

+ Cloud Solution

+ Scientific Investment

- Fungal Spread

Oceania

57% 28% 15%

+ Development

- Health Risk

+ Rare Opportunity

- Manipulation

+ Local Community

- Societal Risk

329
<<<END_PAGE_333>>>

<<<PAGE_334>>>
PULSE OF SOCIETY KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

PULSE OF SOCIETY KNOWLEDGE FOUNDATIONS

330

Media Analysis EMERGING  TOPICS SCIENTIFIC PLATFORM

KEY TAKEAWAYS    Fundamental research topics such as Synthetic  Biology, The Science of the Origins of Life,  Mathematics and Fungal Biology all experienced  a decrease in coverage within the public discourse  compared to last year.

Within Knowledge Foundations, interest is  shifting toward a focus on ecological insights over  pandemic concerns, with coverage of combatting  fungal pandemics plummeting by 31% reflecting  a diminishing urgency post-COVID. Despite the  continued lack of coverage for molecular level  interventions, Archaeology remains strong, with  sustained attraction towards decoding world heritage.

Synthetic Biology is seeing a polarisation of  sentiment, indicating growing public concern  over ethical or societal implications of its rapid  development. Archaeology is also becoming more  divisive, with an increase in those perceiving it  negatively, perhaps due to rising critiques or ethical  concerns surrounding excavation methods, and  cultural sensitivity.

MORE INFORMATION:

go.gesda.global/5-society

2026 GESDA Science Breakthrough Radar®

MAINSTREAM MEDIA GROWTH

MAINSTREAM MEDIA DOMINANCE

SOCIAL  MEDIA SENTIMENT

Knowledge Foundations

20%  Knowledge Foundations

UNIQUE ARTICLES

3 134k 759k

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

50% 30%

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

62% 17%

5.1 Synthetic Biology

-6%  Manufacturing, industry and agriculture

20%  Energy, climate and conservation

-8%  Fundamental synthetic biology

0%  Medicine and health

-3%  Synthetic Biology

4

2

3

1

DOMINANCE

4

1

2

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

38% 45%

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

63% 53% 10%
<<<END_PAGE_334>>>

<<<PAGE_335>>>
5.2 The Science of the  Origins of Life 5.5 Archaeology 5.4 Fungal Biology 5.3 Mathematics

-14%  Palaeoclimate studies -27%  Molecular-level analysis of ancient non-human remains

19%  Fungal ecology and evolution -46%  Opportunities from fundamental fungal biology

-67%  Molecular-level analysis of ancient human remains

11%  Exposing and decoding world heritage

6%  Mechanisms of fungal pathogenesis

-9%  The Science of the Origins of Life

-31%  Combatting fungal pandemics

0%  The Geological record

-2%  Prebiotic chemistry

-8%  Systems biology

-1%  Fungal Biology

-10%  Life 6%  Society

-9%  Mathematics

11%  Archaeology

-19%  Exobiology

-13%  Machines

-4%  Nature

3

2

1 3 4

1

4 3 4

3

2

1

1

2

4

4

2

DOMINANCE DOMINANCE DOMINANCE DOMINANCE

3

4 1 2

4 1

1 3 2

4 1

3 37k

6.7k

340k

242k

2

2

3

4

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

SENTIMENT - 2023-24

63% 48% 30%

57% 33%

34% 13%

61% 27%

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

SENTIMENT - 2024-25

51% 15%

63% 19%

44% 10%

61% 14%

331
<<<END_PAGE_335>>>

<<<PAGE_336>>>
ONLINE PLATFORM

DIGITAL PLATFORM

DIGITAL PLATFORM

Explore our online   digital platform

Explore our online   digital platform

KEY TAKEAWAYS    Fundamental research topics such as Synthetic  Biology, The Science of the Origins of Life,  Mathematics and Fungal Biology all experienced  a decrease in coverage within the public discourse  compared to last year.

All citations included in this book can be found   in the resources tab on the digital platform   using the URL or QR code below.  radar.gesda.global

All citations included in this book can be found   in the resources tab on the digital platform   using the URL or QR code below.  radar.gesda.global

Within Knowledge Foundations, interest is  shifting toward a focus on ecological insights over  pandemic concerns, with coverage of combatting  fungal pandemics plummeting by 31% reflecting  a diminishing urgency post-COVID. Despite the  continued lack of coverage for molecular level  interventions, Archaeology remains strong, with  sustained attraction towards decoding world heritage.

Synthetic Biology is seeing a polarisation of  sentiment, indicating growing public concern  over ethical or societal implications of its rapid  development. Archaeology is also becoming more  divisive, with an increase in those perceiving it  negatively, perhaps due to rising critiques or ethical  concerns surrounding excavation methods, and  cultural sensitivity.
<<<END_PAGE_336>>>

<<<PAGE_337>>>

<<<END_PAGE_337>>>

<<<PAGE_338>>>

<<<END_PAGE_338>>>

<<<PAGE_339>>>

<<<END_PAGE_339>>>

<<<PAGE_340>>>
radar.gesda.global

Geneva Science and Diplomacy Anticipator   A Swiss foundation located in Geneva

Campus Biotech  Chemin des Mines 9, 1202 Geneva www.gesda.global info@gesda.global

© 2026 GESDA. Licensed under CC BY-NC-ND 4.0.
<<<END_PAGE_340>>>
